\chapter{Chronicles}\label{chronicles}

Scholars of the Hebrew Bible have long observed that the book of
Chronicles is a derivative work of Samuel--Kings which reflects the
concerns and religious sensibilities of the late Persian or Early
Hellenistic Periods. For example, in his classic work on the history of
ancient Israel, Wellhausen begins his treatment of the history of
traditions within Judaism with a lengthy discussion of Chronicles which,
he observes, differs from the history of Israel portrayed in
Samuel--Kings due to the chronological distance of the works and the
intervention of the Priestly Code into the theology of Second Temple
Judaism.\autocite[171--172]{wellhausen1957} Chronicles, according to
Wellhausen, provides a clear example of the way that ancient Israel's
traditions evolved over time. Just as the legal material of the
Hexateuch developed over the centuries, so too the traditions of the
historical books were subject to the changing theologies of later
centuries. While the particulars of the relationship of Samuel--Kings to
Chronicles and the nuances of Priestly influences on the Hebrew Bible
remain subject to scholarly debate, the broad consensus remains that
Chronicles was written sometime in the late Persian or early Hellenistic
periods, heavily utilizing Samuel--Kings as a literary source, and
bearing an ideological \emph{Tendenz} influenced by (though not
identical to) the final layers of the Pentateuch.\autocites[For a
thorough and reasonably recent summary of the \emph{status questionis},
see][72--89]{knoppers2003}[See
also][]{japhet1993}{japhet2009}{braun1986}[and][]{coggins1976}

The scholarly discourse surrounding the formation of the Hebrew Bible
has increasingly turned to memory studies as a robust framework for
describing the processes by which the biblical traditions were produced
and
transmitted.\autocites{wright2014}{blenkinsopp2013}{rogerson2010}{davies2008}{hendel2005}{smith_cbq2002}
And, it is for the same reasons that Wellhausen chose to begin his
treatment of the history of traditions with Chronicles, namely, the
relative security with which scholars have dated Samuel--Kings and the
major Pentateuchal strata\textasciitilde{}vis-a-vis Chronicles, that the
work has likewise played an important role as memory studies has become
an increasingly influential lens tough which to view the biblical
traditions.\autocites{benzvi_st2017}{benzvi-a_evans-williams2013}{benzvi-b_evans-williams2013}
Thus, while Chronicles is not the \emph{latest} book in the Hebrew
Bible, it is uniquely situated at the end of the traditioning process
preserved in the Hebrew Bible. In some ways, therefore, Chronicles gets
the last word on a certain set of traditions surrounding the monarchic
period, in particular those of David, Solomon, and the kings of Judah.
