# The Chronicler's Temple: Social Memory and Magnetism in Chronicles 

This chapter will focus on the ways that social and cultural memorytheory can be applied as a model for explaining the processes by whichthe Chronicler[^1] utilized traditions in Samuel--Kings and the way thatthose traditions shaped and were shaped by the social location of theirauthor(s). In particular, I will focus on the memory of the Temple inJerusalem and the way that the figure David---as portrayed inChronicles---functioned together with the temple as "magnetic" sites ofmemory within Judaism.[@benzvi_st2017 73] 

[^1]: Throughout this chapter I will refer to "the Chronicler" to refer simply to the the author or authors who are responsible for the book of Chronicles and not, as others have used the term, to refer to the common author of Chronicles, Ezra and Nehemiah. 

## David's Census and Araunah/Ornan's Threshing Floor

The account of David's census in 2 Samuel and its hypertext in 1Chronicles provides a clear example of the way that present ideologiesplay a significant role in the reception of cultural memory by a societyand its (re)construction in the social memory. Both 2 Samuel 24 and 1Chronicles 21 recount the story of David's census, the punishment thatYahweh inflicts on David for doing so, and David's penitential offeringsat the threshing floor of Araunah/Ornan. 

### 2 Samuel 24

The narrative in 2 Sam 24 begins by stating that Yahweh had become angrywith Israel and "incited David against them" (*wayyāseṯ ʾeṯ-dāwiḏbāhem*). David orders the census and is stricken with remorse (it is notclear in the text why this was a bad thing). Yahweh offers him a choicethrough the prophet Gad between three years of famine, three months ofpursuit, or three days of pestilence. David consents to the pestilence,and, after seeing its destructive force in the form of an angel, pleadswith Yahweh to punish him personally, and not to continue harming thepeople. The prophet Gad instructs David to make offerings to Yahwehwhere he saw the angel, at the threshing floor of Araunah, the Jebusite.David purchases the threshing floor and Araunah's livestock, builds analtar to Yahweh, and makes his offerings. 

The purpose of this pericope within Samuel is not clear and itsostensible connection to 2 Sam 21:1--14 is merelythematic.[@mccarter1984 509] The internal logic of the narrative is noless problematic: the text offer no explanation for Yahweh's anger, nordoes it explain the connection between the census and the pestilence.While Yahweh's initial anger can be accounted for theologically (gods donot need reasons to be angry), the connection between the census and thepestilence seems to be built on some tacit correlation between the two.McCarter, following a number of earlier studies, for example, hassuggested that the danger in taking a census is found in the connectionbetween the census and ritual failure. Drawing comparisons to Num 1:2--3and Exod 30:11--14, McCarter notes that censuses in the ancient worldwere generally performed for military purposes (Num 1:2--3) or to levyfunds (Exod 30:11--14). Since the purpose of David's census seems to bea measurement of military might, it likely would have involved enrollingfighting-aged men in the military (Cf. Num 1:2--3), thereby forcingthose enrolled to remain ritually pure in accordance with militarystandards. The likelihood that not all of the soldiery would be able tomaintain this level of purity would have been high and may have beenthought to invite divine retribution. On the other hand, while thecensus instructions in Exod 30:11--14 were not for the purposes of themilitary, they did require that each person "give a ransom for his lifeto Yahweh" (*nāṯənû ʾı̂š kōp̄er nap̄šô la-yhwh*), "lest a plague come uponthem at their registration" (*lōʾ-yihyeh ḇāhem neḡep̄ bip̄qōḏ ʾōṯām*). Theexplicit connection between registration (√*pqd*) and plague (*neḡep̄*)again passes without explanation, but again, the stipulation that thoseregistered must provide a ransom (a half-shekel to the sanctuary and ahalf-shekel as "an offering to Yahweh" \[*tərûmāh la-yhwh*\]) opens thepossibility for ritual failure. In both cases (maintaining ritual purityand making ransoms), the near-certain failure of some percentage of thepopulation provides a plausible explanation for the association ofpeople-counting and plague. 

At the literary level, then, the function of the pericope could---aswith much of the so-called History of David's Rise (HDR)---be understoodas an *apologia* for David's putative decision to ask for a census(against Joab's advice) and a subsequent calamity perceived to be causedby it. If the story originated from a time when it was well-known thatDavid had commanded the census, the story provides an explanation forwhy David made the decision (at Yahweh's prompting) despite the(apparent) risk of plague that accompanied numbering thepeople.[@mccarter1984 518] Furthermore, David's self-sacrificial postureis put on display through his willingness to take on the punishmentpersonally and by his willingness to purchase Araunah's threshing floor(at full price) and make the appropriate offerings to Yahweh. 

### 1 Chronicles 21

While the broad strokes of 2 Sam 24 and 1 Chr 21 remain quite similar, afew relatively small differences found in 1 Chr 21 dramatically alterthe literary and theological significance of the tale. 

#### Yahweh or (a) Satan?

The most noticeable change made in the Chronicler's narrative is seen inwho incited David to take the census in the first place. While 2 Sam 24attributes this act to Yahweh, 1 Chr 21 introduces a new figure to thestory referred to as *śāṭān*. 1 Chr 21:1 reads: 

> *way-yaʿămōḏ śāṭān ʿal-yiśrāʾēl way-yāseṯ ʾeṯ-dāwı̂ḏ limnôṯ> ʾeṯ-yiśrāʾēl*>> \[a\] *śāṭān* stood up against Israel and he incited David to count> Israel. 

Scholars remain divided over whether *śāṭān* should be understood as asimple indefinite noun "an adversary," [@stokes_jbl2009; @japhet2009114--117; @japhet1993 370--390] or whether the absence of the definitearticle indicates that by the time of the Chronicler, Satan referred toa malevolent spirit which prefigured the more developed, personified"Satan" found in the New Testament.[@rollston_keith-stuckenbruck20164--5] The most common usage of the term *śāṭān* in the Hebrew Biblerefers to human adversaries and accusers generally (see, Num 22:22, 32;1 Sam 29:4, 2 Sam 19:23; 1 Kgs 5:18, 11:14, 23, 25; Ps 38:21, 71:13,109:4, 6, 20, 29). However, the figure *haś-śāṭān* (with definitearticle) in both the prologue to Job (chs. 1--2) and Zech 3:1--2 appearsas a celestial figure to whom Yahweh speaks directly.[^2] Proponents ofreading *śāṭān* as the personal name of a malevolent spirit argue thatthe absence of the definite article indicates that the idea of *theśāṭān* of Job and Zechariah had evolved into a fully personified Satanby the time of the Chronicler.[@braun1986 216--217; @coggins1976107; Rollston also finds this reading compelling, though, not withoutdifficulties. See, @rollston_keith-stuckenbruck2016 4--5] Additionally,while the LXX hails from a slightly later chronological horizon thanChronicles, it is worth noting that the translator used the indefinitesubstantive *diabolos* to translate *śāṭān*---the same term used in Joband Zechariah (also, Ps 108:6) *with* a definite article---which givessome indication that, in the mind of the translator, these passageslikely referred to the same entity.[^3] 

[^2]: This notion is more clear in Job, where *haś-śāṭān* is described in the heavenly courts and is described as having supernatural powers over the health and prosperity of those on the Earth. On the other hand, the reference in Zechariah is somewhat ambiguous. Zech 3:1 reads: *way-yarʾēnı̂ ʾeṯ-yəhôšuaʿ hak-kōhēn hag-gāḏôl ʿōmēḏ lip̄nê malʾaḵ yhwh wə-haś-śāṭān ʿōmēḏ ʿal-yəmı̂nô ləśiṭnô*, "And he showed me Joshua, the high priest standing before the angel of Yahweh, and *haś-śāṭān* was standing on his right (side) to accuse him." The antecedent of "his" in "his right(side)" is unclear. If "his" refers to the *malʾaḵ* Yahweh, then *haś-śāṭān* likely refers to some kind of spiritual being. However, it is possible that "his" refers to Joshua, and that *haś-śāṭān* should be understood as a human adversary. 

[^3]: Elsewhere the LXX renders the nominal forms of *śāṭān* with the feminine *diabolē* or, in the case of 1 Kgs 11:14, simply in transliteration as *satan*. It should be noted, however, that Esther 7:4 and 8:1 render the Hebrew √ṣrr as the masculine *diabolos* as well.

Critics of this view, however, have pointed to the fact that in othercases in the Hebrew Bible, generic nouns that are treated as personalnames or titles often *do* retain the definite article.[@japhet2009114--117; @japhet1993 370--390] Japhet, for example, notes that directreferences to the Canaanite deity Baʿal are always accompanied by thedefinite article. In every instance, the name/title *baʿal* is madegrammatically definite whether by adding the definite article,pronominal suffixes, or being in construct with an explicitly definitenoun.[@japhet2009 115; citing @gkc §126d] In such a case, *śāṭān* shouldsimply be understood as an indefinite noun, "an accuser" and may beunderstood as a human antagonist of David.[@stokes_jbl2009; @japhet2009114--117; @japhet1993 370--390] 

Regardless of how one understands *śāṭān* to be functioning, the authorof Chronicles plainly understood the mechanisms at work---whethersupernatural or interpersonal---differently than the author of 2 Sam 24.Chronicles, therefore, shifts the incitement away from Yahweh andremoves any reference to the deity's anger prior to the census, therebysimplifying the rationale for David's guilt and Yahweh's retribution.The resulting narrative removes the problematic "entrapment" of Davidand absolves Yahweh from seeming so "mercurial."[@rollston_keith-stuckenbruck2016 4] 

#### The Threshing Floor of Araunah/Ornan and the Temple of Solomon

The pericope in 1 Chr 21 likewise ends with a significant deviation fromits hypotext preserved in 2 Sam 24. While both accounts describe theangel of Yahweh relenting from his destructive activities at thethreshing floor of Araunah (=Ornan in 1 Chr 21) the Jebusite, thesignificance of the site as the future location of the Temple of Yahwehin Jerusalem is made explicit only in the Chronicler's account. TheChronicler asserts that the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite wouldbecome the spot for the construction of the Solomon's Temple by puttingit on the lips of David himself in 1 Chr 22:1, stating : 

> *wayyōʾmer dāwı̂ḏ zeh hûʾ bêṯ yhwh hāʾĕlōhı̂m wəzeh-mizbēaḥ ləʿōlāh> ləyiśrāʾēl*>> Then David said, "This is the Temple of Yahweh God, and this altar for> burnt offerings is for Israel" 

The declaration is fulfilled in 2 Chr 3:1 when Solomon begins toconstruct the temple: 

> *wayyāḥel šəlōmōh liḇnôṯ ʾeṯ-bêṯ-yhwh bı̂rûšālaim bəhar hammôrı̂ā ʾăšer> nirʾāh ləḏāwı̂ḏ ʾāḇı̂hû ʾăšer hēḵı̂n bimqôm dāwı̂ḏ bəḡōren ʾornān> ha-yəḇûsı̂*>> Solomon began to build the temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem on mount> Moriah, where Yahweh appeared to David, his father, where David had> designated, at the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite. 

The question of whether the author of the account in 2 Sam 24 understoodthis story to be an etiological account of the founding of the Jerusalemtemple or whether this detail was the invention of the Chronicler,however, is not clear from the biblical text. Unlike the book ofChronicles which gives the precise location of the temple of Solomon,Samuel--Kings makes no specific claims about the location of the temple.Mordechai Cogan has argued that this silence is was rooted in the desireof Deuteronomistic school to forfend the suggestion that the site of thetemple was determined by an historical event, rather than the divineedict.[@cogan_tarbiz1986 307] Thus Cogan seems to imagine that referenceto Araunah's threshing floor must have been removed from the account ofthe temple's construction in 1 Kgs 6--7 by the Deuteronomistic editor inorder to maintain this principle.[@cogan_tarbiz1986 307] On the otherhand, Isaac Kalimi has suggested that the reason for this neglect in 1Kgs 6--7 can be attributed to the assertion that the location of thetemple in Jerusalem (as well as all the other temples in the HebrewBible, whose locations are not specified) was so well known that "therewas no need to mention them."[I would, however, make the observationthat, depending on how one dates the account in 1 Kng 6--7, it may bethe case that an *exilic* author genuinely did not know the preciselocation of the temple. However, Kalimi also points out that other ANEtemple building texts often neglect to specify the precise location oftheir subjects. On this point, I would also hasten to add thatmonumental inscriptions should be treated separately, since the locationof the inscription, ostensibly, *would be* the location of the temple.@kalimi_htr1990 355--356] Furthermore, Kalimi suggests that theselection of Araunah's threshing floor as the future location of thetemple was made sufficiently clear by the account of 2 Sam 24 therebyobviating the need to repeat the location in 1 Kings.[@kalimi_htr1990357] The Chronicler, therefore, merely makes explicit that which theDeuteronomistic Historian meant to imply. 

I am not at all convinced by either of the above arguments. Instead, Isuspect that the construction account in 1 Kings makes no mention ofAraunah's threshing floor because, at the time of its composition, theconnection had not been made. The significance of threshing floors aspreferred locations for theophanies has been documentedelsewhere[McCarter points to Jdgs 6:37 among other, less clear, examplesfrom the Hebrew Bible. He also notes their significance in the Ugariticliterature (KTU 1 17.5.4ff; 19.1.19ff) @mccarter1984 511--512; See also@waters2015] and the fact that 2 Sam 24 recounts a sort of theophany maybe enough to account for its mention in the narrative. 

Although it is not clear whether the connection was made originally bythe Chronicler himself or whether it was an inherited tradition, therationale for making Ornan's threshing floor the site of the templelikely grew from an uneasiness with the notion that David built andutilized an altar at a secondary location (viz., a place that was notthe tabernacle). At the same time, the Chronicler understood that thefuture location of the temple would be in Jerusalem and had to deal withthe fact that David not only made the offerings, but did so at thecommand of Yahweh. To resolve these tensions, the Chronicler was able toassert that David, indeed, made sacrifices outside the tabernacle, butwith his offerings, he laid the groundwork for the construction of thetemple. 

## Constructing the Memory of the Chronicler's Temple

Having addressed the particular ways and specific rationales that theChronicler likely employed while composing 1 Chr 21, we may now turn tothe topic of social memory and the ways that this theoretical frameworkcan be utilized to explore the phenomenon of biblical rewriting. Whilethe individual changes and additions made by the Chronicler may, ontheir own, provide some insight into the ideology of the Chronicler andhis position toward a few theological topics, treating the Chronicler'swork as social memory attempts to take this a step further. Beyondquestioning the intention of the author, social memory theory seeks toexplore the ways that received traditions may have functioned at thesocial level as a part of a community's essential project of identitybuilding and maintenance.[Ben Zvi puts it well: "Everything is supposedto be forgotten except that which is supposed to be remembered by agroup. Social, shared remembering within a group involves and requires asocial effort by the relevant group, but without such an effort andshared memory, the group itself would cease to exist." @benzvi_st201770] 

### Magnetism

In the context of social memory theory, magnetism refers to the qualityof certain core sites of a community's social memory which tend toaccumulate additional significances over time as more ideas and sites ofmemory become "attracted" to it.[I have borrowed this term from Ben Zvi,who has used the term in numerous contexts. See @benzvi_st2017; also@benzvi_edelman-benzvi2013] The analogy could be extended further bythinking of this magnetism in the context of the interaction ofgravitational forces between bodies in space. Larger mnemonic nodes,given their greater "mass," attract smaller bodies to themselves formingorbital systems akin to the way that the planets of our solar system areheld in orbit by the sun and how the moon is held by the gravitationalforces of Earth. As more nodes attach themselves the relative mass ofthe core mnemonic node (that is, the larger "central" node) continues togrow in a sort of "positive feedback loop."[@benzvi_edelman-benzvi20136; Alternatively, this idea could be modeled using graph theory as ascale-free network and treating central mnemonic sites as hubs andperipheral sites as sparse nodes. See, @barabasi_science2009] Within thebiblical tradition, perhaps the premier example of such a node withinthe Hebrew Bible is Moses. Ben Zvi writes: 

> Not only does he bring together Torah/the bestowal of Torah with the> Exodus, but he also serves as the foundational prophet, scribe,> lawgiver and so on. Even the story of Israel's rejection of YHWH and> subsequent punishment and future reconciliation is directly associated> with him.[@benzvi_st2017 73--74] 

Using this model, the book of Deuteronomy functions as one means bywhich traditions become attached to Moses through the retelling processand the ability of the author to synthesize lesser sites of memory withcentral ideas and figures creating newer, even more significant andhighly connected mnemonic sites. 

Both the Jerusalem temple and king David loom large in biblical memory,so it is no surprise that both of these mnemonic sites functionmagnetically. In the case of David, for example, it is commonly arguedthat one Elhanan, and not David, was the historical defeater of Goliaththe Gittite, as recorded in 2 Sam 21:19b: 

> *wayyaḵ ʾelḥānān ben-yaʿrê ʾōrəḡı̂m bêṯ hallaḥmı̂ ʾēṯ golyāṯ haggittı̂> wəʿēṣ ḥănı̂ṯô kimnôr ʾōrəḡı̂m*>> Elhanan, son of Yaʿre-Oregim (the Bethlehemite), killed Goliath the> Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver's beam. 

In this case, it is supposed that the more potent mnemonic site (David)is connected to the well-known slaying of the Philistine giant at theexpense of Elhanan. The extended narrative of David and Goliath from 1Sam 17, likewise bears the signs of magnetism. In fact, the name"Goliath" only occurs twice in the extended narrative, in vv. 4 and 23,which has caused some scholars to question whether the identification ofthe "giant" with Goliath was, like David, a secondary addition. In everyother instance throughout the narrative, the man is referred to simplyas "the Philistine." Thus, it is supposed that the story originally mayhave been entirely anonymous, and only later were these figuresidentified with David and Goliath.[For a fuller account of the textualissues surrounding the main narrative about David and Goliath, see,@mccarter1980 280--309; and @mckenzie2000 69--77] Thus McCarter's,observation that "\[d\]eeds of obscure heroes tend to attach themselvesto famous heroes,"[@mccarter1984 450] though not rooted in memory theory*per se*, fits our model for "magnetic" figures. 

Within the story of David's census and the threshing floor of Oruna in 1Chr 21, several mnemonic sites can be understood as exhibiting magneticqualities. First, although the identity of *śāṭān* is not clear in thetext, later treatments of the story, including in the LXX, treat thecharacter as a malevolent supernatural being. The potency---at least inthe interpretation of later periods---of Satan was able to don thisparticular mischief and take credit for the incitement of David to sin.One might imagine, given *haśśāṭān*'s subordinate position Yahweh in theprologue to Job, that the two passages were not seen to be in directconflict with one another, whatever the original intent of theChronicler might have been. Shifting the incitement of David away fromYahweh can be explained by the ostensible discomfort (or confusion)created by the story in 2 Sam 24, but, supposing *śāṭān* was imagined bythe Chronicler to be a supernatural being, we can account for theChronicler's choice as an example of magnetism on the part of Satan. 

Second, the identification of Ornan's threshing floor with the futuresite of the Solomonic Temple creates an explicit connection between twovery potent mnemonic sites: David and the Temple. The discoursesurrounding the fact that it was Solomon and not David who constructedthe Temple of Yahweh predates even the DtrH, as indicated by 2 Sam 7,but the degree to which David involves himself in making preparationsfor the construction of the temple in 1 Chr 22:2--29:22 indicates thatDtrH did not get the last word on the matter. While 2 Sam 7 provides anapologia for why it was Solomon, and not David, who built the temple,Chronicles takes it a step further by attributing the planning andpreparation of the temple's construction to David, leaving only the mostnominal tasks for the temple's "builder," Solomon. The inability ofDavid's mnemonic gravitas to fully absorb the temple's constructionillustrates the immutability of certain mnemonic sites, particularlythose such as buildings and geographic features, despite the relativesignificance of David for the continued maintenance of Judean identitycontinued into the Period Solomon. 

Finally, after identifying the site of the temple of Solomon withOrnan's threshing floor, and drawing the mnemonic sites of the templeand king David even closer together, the Chronicler includes oneadditional piece of information to the reader in the description of thetemple's construction in 2 Chr 3:1: 

> *wayyāḥel šəlōmōh liḇnôṯ ʾeṯ-bêṯ-yhwh bı̂rûšālaim bəhar hammôrı̂ā ʾăšer> nirʾāh ləḏāwı̂ḏ ʾāḇı̂hû ʾăšer hēḵı̂n bimqôm dāwı̂ḏ bəḡōren ʾornān> hayəḇûsı̂*>> Solomon began to build the temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem *on the> mountain of Moriah* where he appeared to David, his father, the place> which David designated, on the threshing floor of Ornan, the Jebusite. 

Although this is the only reference to the *mountain* of Moriah in theHebrew Bible, the *land* of Moriah is mentioned only in Gen 22, theAqeda, as the land to which Abraham was to bring Isaac for sacrifice (ona mountain!).[@kalimi_htr1990 358--359] The reference to Moriah appearsto be another example of the magnetic quality of core events in acommunity's identity. In the same way that David's sacrificial acts atthe threshing floor of Ornan---in the memory of theChronicler---prefigured and made acceptable the offerings made by Davidthere, so too the near-sacrifice of Isaac, by its geographic associationwith the foundation of the temple in Jerusalem, becomes a prototype forthe sacrificial cult.[In fact, makes this point explicit and traces thetradition into early Christianity. See @vermes1961 204--211] 

## Conclusions

Traditional approaches to the book of Chronicles have focused on thesources, interpretive strategies, and ideologies that the Chroniclerutilized in the composition of his work. For this reason, the Chronicler*himself* is credited (or blamed, as the case may be) for the sometimessignificant differences between the stories preserved in Samuel--Kingscompared to their reflexes in Chronicles. Even those studies which dealextensively with the ideology of the Chronicler have tended to focus onsuch ideologies and their impact on the *individual* of the Chronicler.By putting so much weight upon the Chronicler as an individual, however,scholars have---it seems to me---been less open to considering the waysthat the Chronicler himself may have been influenced by a body oftradition that---while perhaps rooted in the text ofSamuel--Kings---informed the way that he presented his history. Althoughthe author of Chronicles should be given credit for some creativeinvention, the Chronicler was a product of his age and was himselfinfluenced by received traditions formed well after Samuel--Kings waswritten. The memory approach, on the other hand, focuses on the the waysthat traditions are transmitted over time, and how their malleabilityallows them to be reshaped by each successive generation, as well astheir potency for affecting the contemporary cultural discourse. In thecase of Chronicles, the magnetic quality of David is shown by the way hehad become associated with the other core sites of memory and Judahiteidentity such as the building of the temple, and even (by extension) theAqedah. While it is not impossible to suppose that the Chroniclerhimself made these connections, the more plausible reconstruction of theways that these traditions about David, the temple, and the broaderPentateuchal traditions converged involves a more robust set of socialand cultural processes which the memory approach addresses. 