
# Social Memory Studies and the ~RwB

The past several decades, beginning in the late 1970's, a dramatic increase in scholarly interest toward the topic of "memory" has swept throughout the social sciences. The precipitous rise in scholarly literature dealing with topics of memory coupled with its proliferation in popular media discourses has prompted some in the field to refer to the "memory industry" and to describe the ubiquity of memory discourses as a "boom" fast-approaching a bust.[@rosenfeld_jmh2009; @winter2006; @berliner_aq2005] Yet, as Olick et al. make very clear in their Introduction to *The Collective Memory Reader*, there remain a significant number of scholars throughout the social sciences who continue to find "memory" to a useful heuristic and a compelling theoretical basis for their various and sundry analytical applications.[@olick_olick-etal2011, 3--6] 

Although the topic of "memory" has been of interest philosophers and thinkers since the ancient Greeks, as Olick and Robbins note, the modern social-scientific approaches which concern this chapter almost exclusively trace their genealogy to the early 20th century work of sociologist Maurice Halbwachs.[@olick-robbins_ars1998, 106; It should be noted, however, that Halbwachs was not the first or only person to do work on memory or the impact of society thereon, despite most recent literature's preoccupation with him, see @olick_olick-etal2011, 8--36] Although Halbwachs's work was not limited to exploring the topic of social memory (he also made contributions to statictics and probability theory, as well as sociological work on the topic of suicide and social morphology[@coser_halbwachs1992, 13--20]), his work in this area has managed to endure and continues to find new applications and to inspire new approaches in ways that his other contributions have not.

## The Work of Maurice Halbwachs: A Very Brief Overview

Halbwachs published three primary works on the topic of memory, the first of which appeared in 1925 under the title *The Social Frameworks of Memory*.[@halbwachs1925] This monograph, along with a short essay dealing with the remembered geography the Holy Land, entitled *The Legendary Topography of the Holy Land*[@halbwachs1941] was excerpted and translated by Lewis Coser in a single volume under the title *On Collective Memory* in 1992.[Several of the most important chapters of *The Social Frameworks of Memory* were included in full. Likewise, the entirety of the conclusion of *The Legendary Topography* was included @halbwachs1992] His final contribution, entitled *The Collective Memory*, was published posthumously in 1950 and translated into English in 1980 with an editorial introduction by Mary Douglas.[@halbwachs1980] This work simultaneously represents some of Halbwachs's most developed ideas (responding to critics such as Charles Blondel) and evinces an incompleteness which posthumous publications often suffer. As Coser observes, "One may doubt that the author himself would have been willing to publish it in what seems to be an unfinished state. The book nevertheless contains many further developments of Halbwachs's thought in regard to such matters as the relation of space and time to collective memory as well as fruitful definitions and applications of the differences between individual, collective, and historical memory."[@coser_halbwachs1992]

The central contribution of Halbwachs's work was the notion that human memory is intrinsically and inextricably tied to social frameworks. Humans are social beings and as such human processes, such as memory, can only be completed within the context of a society. This focus on the *social* dimensions of memory betrays the deep influence that Émile Durkheim's work had on Halbwachs. Unlike Durkheim, however, Halbwachs's approach was tempered by his desire to identify the physical (or, perhaps "biological") location of memory within the individual. Although the term "collective memory" evokes an ethereal or metaphysical idea, Halbwachs's use of the term is entirely concrete. Individual memories are kept by *individuals*. However, an individual's ability to retrieve and utilize a particular memory is intrinsically tied to the individual's social context. Memories require social frameworks to function.[@halbwachs1992, 38]

To illustrate this point, Halbwachs begins *The Social Frameworks of Memory* by attempting to prove the negative. *Without* a social framework, he argues, memories are always incomplete. Because humans---for all intents and purposes---always exist within a society, it is the dream state, he avers, that most closely approximates the complete isolation of memory from society. Therefor the way that the human brain deals with memories while dreaming can illustrate the (dis)function of memories lacking a social framework. Thus, he observes that "dreams are composed of fragments of memory too mutilated and mixed up with others to allow us to recognize them." Because in dream states the mind lacks the ability to "check" itself against anything external to itself, dreams do not contain "true memories."[@halbwachs1992, 41] This assertion is set against the "purely individual psychology",[E.g., Bergson, and Freud. See @ansellpearson_radstone-schwarz2011; and @terdiman_radstone-schwarz2011] which viewed *memory* as a location of social isolation. Regarding the incompleteness of the dream state, he writes:

> Almost completely detached from the system of social representations, [the dream state's] images are nothing more than raw materials, capable of entering into all sorts of combinations. They establish only random relations among each other---relations based on the disordered play of corporal modification.[@halbwachs1992, 42]

The "system of social representations" that Halbwachs refers to is not limited, however, to macro structures such as familial, religious, or class groups. Although these structures certainly *do* make up an important stratum of social frameworks, Halbwachs envisions something much more fundamental which betrays his broadly structuralist perspective. Halbwachs uses the phrase "social representations" to refer to a  system of  shared "signs" that encompassed not only language, but every aspect of a group's social framework---a sort of "cultural *langue*." Although, Halbwachs does not use the language of semiotics, the analogy is helpful. Just as Saussurian linguistics argues that the concrete arbitrary sign is given meaning only by participating in the broader, shared *langue*, so too memories (read: "signs") require a framework to convey meaning, as do the concrete, individual expressions of remembrance (read: *parole*). Halbwachs writes:

> It is in this sense that there exists a collective memory and social frameworks for memory; it is to the degree that our individual thought places itself in these frameworks and participates in this memory that it is capable of the act of recollection.[@halbwachs1992, PAGE].

Memories, therefore, cannot be understood in isolation from their social framework and therefore should not be analyzed without consideration to the social context of the rememberer. 

Of course, people participate in a plurality of social groups, often simultaneously, and the experiences that are later to be recalled, too, must be situated within these frameworks. In order to bring these autobiographical memories to mind, according to Halbwachs, an individual attempts to mentally situate herself within those same frameworks. For instance, I find it much easier to recall whether a particular course I have taken occurred in the Fall or Spring semester, rather than which month or even year it occurred. The social framework that is the "academic year" remains a potent framework for my own memories, while my wife---who had the good sense to stop after one degree---stopped remembering in terms of "semesters" years ago. Yet, when remembering events during her time at the University, the semester once again becomes a useful framework for memory.  It is for this reason that recent memories are more easy to call to mind: because the social frameworks that produced the memory (the people, places, customs, etc.) remain in close proximity for the rememberer and the effort required to situate the memory within the social frameworks that produced it is minimal.[@halbwachs1992, 52] 

This overview is representative of his central thesis and provides a point of departure for his more in-depth studies of collective memory in the family, religion, and social classes. Thus, by "social" memory, Halbwachs refers to individual memory and how it is recalled within externally defined social frameworks, i.e. how society provides the framework that makes individual memory possible.[@hubenthal_carstens-hasselbalch2012, 180] On the other hand, "collective" memory refers to shared memory, "the shared cultural past to which individuals contribute and upon which they call; but ultimately a past that transcends individual memory."[@keith_ec2015, 360; See also @hubenthal_carstens-hasselbalch2012, 180] The two ideas work together and mutually influence one another. As Hübenthal puts it, "The difference [between social and collective memory] lies in the perspective: *social memory* is using the framework, *collective memory* is establishing it."[@hubenthal_carstens-hasselbalch2012, 180.] Hübenthal's use of the active verb "establish" is intentional: for Halbwachs, collective memory is not a passive social accretion, but an actively constructed part of the group's common identity which *speaks to the to concerns and needs of the community in the present*.  Social frameworks shape the way that people remember. The retrieval of memories is shaped by those same frameworks, and as those frameworks shift, so too do the memories that are recalled in those societies.[For a modern assessments on the malleability of human memory and the effects of social networks on the formation of collective memory, see @coman-etal_pnas2016; @yamashiro-hirst_jarmc2014; @coman-etal_yang-etal2012]

## Memory and History

In his later work, Halbwachs distinguished between two kinds of memory which were distinguished by the experiential-relation of the individual to the memory: autobiographical and historical memory.[@halbwachs1980, 52] Autobiographical memory refers to the sort of memories which are the result of individual, subjective experience, while historical memory refers to memories which fall outside the experience of the individual. Elsewhere Halbwachs refers to these as "internal" and "external" memory. Autobiographical memory is rooted in the individual, sensory, experiences of the individual and provides a full, "thick" memory (to borrow from Geertz) while historical memory, necessarily, offers only a thin, schematic overview and by definition is never "experienced" by the rememberer.

Although Halbwachs distinguished between these two forms of memory, he nevertheless emphasized their interrelatedness. In particular, Halbwachs notes that autobiographical memory necessarily is dependent upon historical memory, insofar as our lives participate in "general history."[@halbwachs1980, 52] For example, memories of a more indirect nature are able to shape autobiographical memory by shaping the social frameworks which produced them and the frameworks into which they are recalled. The quintessential example of this sort of indirect influence for Americans of roughly my age would be the events of September 11, 2001. Although comparatively few people directly witnessed the events (I was asleep on the West Coast when the first plane crashed), the impact that those events had (and continue to have) on the orientation of American national memory is unquestionably a part of many people's lived experience, including my own and would therefore constitute a part of America's current "collective memory." Although the incoming undergraduate class at the University of Texas at Austin, many of whom will have been born after 2001, have *no* autobiographical memory of these events, it is, nonetheless, a part of the collective memory of which they are a part. On the other hand the War of 1812 is not a part of any living person's autobiographical memory and its impact on the collective memory of most Americans is likely restricted to a few popular media references,[^Such as Jimmy Driftwood's *The Battle of New Orleans*, best known as performed by Johnny Horton which topped *Billboard* charts in the US, Canada, and Australia in 1959 and was recently  acknowledged to be on of the Top 100 Western songs of all time. See, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Battle_of_New_Orleans.] or localized to specific geographical regions with a close connection to major events in the conflict (e.g., New Orleans). 

The memories of historical events, however, are shaped by the social frameworks of the rememberer. The events of September 11, 2001 in the memory of most Americans are now shaped by the social discourses surrounding the United States's continued military presence in the region and its controversial pretexts for engagement in the region, in particular with the Iraq war. Likewise, although no living person has an autobiographical memory of the American Civil War, the construction of certain confederate monuments on the campus of the University of Texas at Austin   during the Jim Crow era, and their subsequent removal in August of 2017, illustrates how historical memory can be (consciously, in this case) reshaped and restructured as the remembering society changes.

It is the way that these remembered events change over time that makes social memory studies so  interesting for the historian. Halbwachs's own work in the area of history is best seen in his work on *The Legendary Topography of the Holy Land*, where he focuses on the ways that memories relate to particular geographic sites. In particular, Halbwachs's study focuses on the way that the sites in and around the Galilee and Jerusalem have been imbued with significance based on their putative connection with some significant event relating to Jesus, the Apostles, and early Christian communities. Halbwachs makes a number observations about the way that memories are formed and the ways that they interact which will become important for the current study.

Halbwachs's first observation comes in contrasting the portrayal of Jesus within the Gospels with what must have been the lived experience of the Apostles.[@halbwachs1992, 193--198] The involvement of the apostles in the day-to-day life of Jesus in some sense would have prohibited them from achieving the kind of "necessary detachment" to write something like the the Gospels. In other words (and to use Halbwachs's later terminology), the memory of Jesus as protrayed in the Gospels is almost necessarily informed by *historical* rather than autobiographical memory.[@halbwachs1992, 194] Indeed, Halbwachs rightly observes that the Gospels present Jesus and his ministry "as if Jesus's whole life was but a preparation for his death, as if this was what he had announced in advance."[@halbwachs1992, 198] Surely Jesus's mother remembered the death of her son differently than the way the Church later commemorated it.[It is worth noting that Halbachs himself compares his basic sentiment toward the historicity of the Gospels as similar to that of Ernst Renan. Of course, the field of New Testament studies has progressed considerably in content, method, and nuance beyond Renan, whatever the merits of his work may have been. While Halbachs seems to take seriously that Jesus did exist, he does not accept the Gospels at face value as historically accurate. That said, throughout the work, Halbwachs does talk about the "actual" past and allows for the possibility that the Gospels do refer, at least partially, to these real events. Which is to say, he is not making the argument that the Gospels were fabricated of whole-cloth, but that the "actual past" is irretrievable and unknowable and that historical memory has no obligation to align with the actual past as such. Regardless of whether Halbwachs's conception of Early Christianity would be considered sound today, the idea that the Gospels represent several collective remembrances of Jesus's life, ministry and death each bearing marks from their own *Sitz im Leben* (to borrow from the form critics) seems relatively uncontroversial. A number of studies on the Jesus and early Christian memory have come about in the past several years. See @ledonne2009; @rodriguez2010; For an overview of the modern impact of Halbwachs (and memory studies more generally) on the field of Historical Jesus studies, see @keith_ec2015; and @keith_ec2015b]

Halbwachs, drawing on the Pauline epistles, observes that the earliest recollections of Jesus, however, make no mention of the location of his death (Jerusalem) nor of his ministry (Galilee).

> In the authentic epistles of Paul, we are told only that the son of God has come to earth, that he died for our sins, and that he was brought back to life again. There is no allusion to the circumstances of his life, except for the Lord's Supper, which, Paul says, appeared to him in a vision (and not through witnesses). There is no indication of locality, no question of Galilee, or of the preachings of Jesus on the shores of the lake of Gennesaret.[@halbwachs1992, 209]

Halbwachs's point is that within the narrative of the Gospels, the location of Jesus's death---by virtue of the social and political reality of the day---*had* to occur in Jerusalem.[@halbwachs1992, 211] Whether or not it actually did, or whether or not that information was explicitly handed down to the authors of the Gospels is irrelevant for the purposes of collective memory. Sacred places become sacred through the process of memory *construction*, not simply through the transmission of autobiographical experience. According to Halbwachs, they are spaces where significant ideas within the collective memory of a group can take concrete form. He writes, "Sacred places thus commemorate not facts certified by contemporary witnesses but rather beliefs born perhaps not far from these places and strengthened by taking root in this environment."[@halbwachs1992, 199] Thus, localizing historical memory functions as a way to move abstract ideas into the real world and thus reinforce fundamental components of the group's collective memory.

Perhaps more interesting is Halbwachs's treatment of the ability for memories to coalesce and split over time. Halbwachs makes the observation that, according to tradition (i.e., the collective memory of the Church), certain places in the Holy Land mark the location of *several* significant events. From an historical perspective Halbwachs, obviously, doubts that assertions are accurate---even assuming the events may have taken place one place or another---but, finds the clustering of these events to be more than just coincidence. For example, he writes:

> One is surprised to find on the shores of the lake Gennesaret, near the Seven Fountains, the place where apostles were chosen, the Sermon on the Mount, the appearance of Jesus on the waters after the Resurrection---all in the same place.[@halbwachs1992, 220]

Halbwachs's assumption is that there was something about the location *itself*, some "earlier consecration,"[@halbwachs1992, 220] which attracted these memories to particular locales. Extending this rationale further, we can appreciate the fact that for Christianity, the significance of Jerusalem is not limited to the significance of the city as the location of Jesus's death, but rather by the prior significance of the city for Judaism. Within the collective memory of Christian tradition, one might say that Jerusalem is not significant because it is the location of the Passion and resurrection of Jesus, but that the Passion and resurrection of Jesus happened in Jerusalem because Jerusalem was significant. Halbwachs writes:

> The Christian collective memory could annex a part of Jewish collective memory only by appropriating part of the latter's local remembrance while at the same time transforming its entire perspective of historical space.[@halbwachs1992, 215]

One might object to this suggestion by noting that, supposing Jesus *actually was* crucified in Jerusalem, one hardly needs to re-appropriate Jewish tradition or attribute this remembrance to some special process. Yet, it is worth pointing out in cases where the historical data are lacking (or, perhaps, where eyewitness accounts did not exist), this same basic phenomenon occurred. For example, Halbwachs points to the birth narratives of the Gospels, in particular that of Matthew, where Jesus is described as being born in Bethlehem, the "city of David." Although there is no reason to think that Jesus was *actually* born in Bethlehem, Halbwachs, rightly observes, "the authors of the gospels seem entirely to have invented this poetic history which has occupied a considerable place in Christian History."[@halbwachs1992, 214] In fact, Jesus's entire portrayal in the Gospel of Matthew is an exercise in collective remembrance which is structured on the foundational narratives of the Hebrew Bible (e.g., the slaughter of innocents, and Jesus's portrayal as a lawgiver "on the mount"), and framed as the fulfillment of Jewish prophecy.

The inverse of this phenomenon is also observable. According to Halbwachs while some events converge to particular locations, other events diverge among several sites. One expression of this process is by dividing the *event* and localizing each part of the event to a particular place or object. For example, Halbwachs notes how the memory of specific important events, such as the Passion, may be split and localized at a very fine level of detail:

> Around Golgotha and the Holy Sepulchre, for example, we find the rock of anointing, the rock of the angel, the rock of the gardener, the place where Jesus was stripped, etc.[@halbwachs1992, 220]

The proliferation of these micro-sites of memory, according to Halbwachs, aide and reinforce the collective memory through repetition. Furthermore, the added detail serves in "renewing and rejuvenating an ancient image."[@halbwachs1992, 220]

The same event may also be localized in multiple places. Halbwachs describes several traditional locations of the Cenacle (the "Upper Room" from the Gospels), including the Mount of Olives, Gethsemane, and the Grotto of Jesus's teaching. These traditions coexisted into the fourth century, yet, later, the site was moved to the Christian hill of Zion. Likewise, Halbachs notes there were two locations for Emmaus and two different mountains on which Jesus appeared in Galilee after his resurrection. While it runs counter to our modern historiographical sensibilities, the ability of  seemingly contradictory traditions to coexist is well documented. 

Halbwachs points out that autobiographical memory does not allow for this kind of fragmentation. We all realize that the same event from our own past can not have happened in two locations simultaneously. Yet, Halbwachs  points out that should that same person belong to two groups who disagree on a particular remembered event (one that the individual did not personally witness), the individual is able to hold the disagreement without the need assert one or the other. the same is true of complex social entities, such as religious groups, who are composed of several subgroups with their own collective memories. Halbwachs writes:

> A community must often accommodate itself to contradictions introduced by diverse groups so long as none of these groups prevails, or so long as the community itself does not find a new reason for decisively settling the issue. This is especially true when the community faces a controversy about its rites, which are an anchor for its component groups.[@halbwachs1992, 224]



## The Memory Boom

Halbwachs's work, while not ignored, did not make its most significant contributions until well after his death. It is frequently argued that the so-called 'memory boom,' which began in the 1980's in the wake of the 'theory boom,' picked up Halbwachs's terminology and central ideas in an attempt to deal with perceived insufficiency of traditional historiography to deal with the sorts of major, traumatic events which characterized the mid 20th Century.[@galinsky_galinsky2016, 1--2; See also @olick_olick-etal2011, 29--36. One cannot help but speculate that---at least in the English-speaking world---the translation of *The Collective Memory* in 1980 contributed to the popularity of Halbwachs's terminology.] Works such as Yosef ~yerushalmi's *Zakhor: Jewish History and Jewish Memory* and Pierre Nora's  *Les Lieux de mémoire* are typically cited as the foundational works of the modern memory boom.[@klein2011, 112--113; @yerushalmi1989; Nora's massive project has been abridged and translated into English as @nora1996]

In *Zakhor*, ~yerushalmi is quick to identify the tension between what traditional cultures and societies remember about their past and how the modern discipline of history treats the past. For remembering groups, what is preserved in the collective memory is what is useful for the edification of that group---whether through religious ritual, family stories, or some other combination of received traditions.  Of course, prior to the enlightenment, this was the default mode of understanding the past for most people, and remains so for many social groups, including those within modern, Western societies. In particular, ~yerushalmi addresses this tension for the Jewish historian---a vocation which, he notes, is a recent phenomenon. Although, ancient Israel and Judah, clearly, were concerned with historical matters---much of the Hebrew Bible is preoccupied with narrating events from the perceived past---these codified traditions are preserved in a plurality of socio-religious groups for a complex set of purposes spanning cultural, social, and theological modes of discourse which are fundamentally at odds with the modern discipline of history. Thus, the biblical command to "remember," is not a command to keep tedious notes of historically accurate events, but a cultural and theological imperative to maintain the foundational narratives of the community. ~yerushalmi writes:

> There the fact that history has meaning does not mean that everything that happened in history is meaningful or worthy of recollection. Of Manasseh of Judah, a powerful king, who reigned for fifty-five years in Jerusalem, we hear only that "he did what was evil in the sight of the Lord" (II Kings 21:2).[@yerushalmi1989, 10]

In other words, what was remembered about Manasseh by the biblical tradants were those details which were useful for their socio-religious projects. The rules and methods of this process---remembering what is important and forgetting what is not---are generally not explicit or transparent. 

**Paragraph on Nora**

The modern discipline of history, on the other hand, generally attempts to uphold a certain set of explicit methodological and theoretical criteria which---while not exempt from distortion by the subjectivity of the historian---can be corroborated or contradicted by evidence and argumentation.[As Daniel Pioske puts it, "What separates the act of historiography from the recounting of a culture's sanctioned memories is consequently the historians' determination to isolate and compare disparate testimonies about the past with other past traces that ma corroborate or discredit their claims." @pioske_bibint2015, 302--303] While the historian participates in the collective memory of her own society, her reconstruction of the past attempts to approach the topic from the outside. The historian, too, (re)constructs the past, but the goals of the historian are, as ~yerushalmi puts it, to recreate "an ever more detailed past whose shapes and textures memory does not recognize."[@yerushalmi1989, 94; See also @verovsek_pgi2016, 532] Even the most theory-conscious historian cannot help but struggle in avoidng older discourses about "what really happened" particularly when stated over and against memory in the form of received tradition. All of this is not to say that modern history writing is in any meaningful sense "objective," nor that the historian is able to remove herself from her own socio-political context. So, although memory and history both offer reconstructions of the past, it is important to affirm that their modes of doing so are radically different.[Pioske observes, "The epistemological tension observed by Ricoeur between memory and history is thus understood as the outcome of two processes that, though having the similar intent of re-presenting former phenomena, nevertheless pursue and mediate the past through quite disparate means." @pioske_bibint2015, 302]

Thus the memory "boom" has, in some circles, been viewed as anti-historical and an attempt at "resacrilization of the past" brought about by the disenchantment of the past by modern historical consciousness[@winter2006, 282] Kerwin Klein, for example, traces the origins of scholarly discourse surrounding memory and lists five narratives that others have offered as explanations for the origins of memory discourse in society generally:

> We have, then, several alternative narratives of the origins of our new memory discourse. The first, following Pierre Nora, holds that we are obsessed with memory because we have destroyed it with historical consiousness. A second holds that memory is a new category of experience that grew out of the modernist crisis of the self in the nineteenth century and the gradually eveloved into our current usage. A third sketches a tale in which Hegelian historicism took up premodern forms of memory that we have since modified through structural vocabularies. A fourth implies that memory is a mode of discourse natural to people without history, and so its emergence is a salutary feature of decolonization. And a fifth claims that memory talk is a belated response to the wounds of modernity.[@klein_klein2011, 134]

Although Klein finds none of these "fully satisfying," it is noteworthy that the general trend among these narratives corroborates the thesis that memory represents a "reaction" against history in some form. 

Whatever combination of these causes may have ultimately brought about the memory boom, the problem remains, according to Klein, that "memory" has come to dominate historical discourse as a "therapeutic alternative" to history in place of a rigorous scientific methodology.[@klein2011, 137] As Winter puts it, "It is a fix for those who cannot stand the harshness of critical thinking or historical analysis."[@winter2006, 283] Although I think Klein under-appreciates the value of the memory discourse as a meaningful mode of inquiry, I am in fact, quite sympathetic to his critique overall. As methodologies for querying the past, memory and history operate on different sets of hermeneutical and epistemological foundations, which is, I think, one of ~yerushalmi's main points. However, what Klein does not address is the way that, for modern Westerners, history *is* our collective memory (or at least, heavily influences our collective memory). This is what Nora means when he says that "We speak so much of memory because there is so little of it left."[@nora_representations1989, 7] And for Klein, this is a good thing---historical consciousness is uniquely valuable as a scientific endeavor and jettisoning this critical posture toward the past is tantamount to abandoning the enlightenment.

For modern historians studying the collective memory of other modern people, it is easy to conflate the historical consciousness of the historian subject and that of the object. Such historical work relies on court documents, news articles, eyewitness accounts, and other documentary evidence that operates within an historical consciousness that closely resembles that of the historian. As a result, the historian can utilize her own historical intuitions when interacting with her sources. In Halbwachsian terms, the social frameworks (in this case the understanding of the way "history" is done) of the historian and their object of study are quite similar. For example, reading news reports from the mid-twentieth century does not require the historian to dramatically reorient her understanding of what "news" is. On the other hand, when studying ancient history, the intellectual distance between the source and the historian is, often, much more pronounced. Reading "historical" texts which present themselves in fairly neutral terms often requires a degree of hermeneutical suspicion that similar documents from the modern age do not. 

In fact, biblical scholars in particular have been dealing with this problem since the enlightenment. The tension between memory and history is played out clearly in both Jewish and Christian circles ~vis-a-vis historical-critical study of the Bible. Insofar as the Bible forms a major portion of both Jewish and Christian collective memory, historical-critical approaches to the biblical text continue to be met with fervent opposition in more conservative traditions. Parallels to what Klein describes within the discipline of History can be seen within biblical studies as well. Consider, for example, the way that Brevard Childs's canonical approach attempted to "overcome the long-established tension between the canon and criticism."[@childs1979, 45] For Childs, writing an introduction to the Old Testament in the traditional manner (i.e., as an historical-critical introduction) was insufficient for use in churches or synagogues because it bypassed a fundamental aspect of the biblical text, the canon. Although he does not use the language of memory in his discussion of canon (though, it should be noted he made an important early contribution to the idea of memory in the biblical tradition which, I imagine, is not a coincidence[@childs1962]), here we can see that the various canons of scripture in use by Christians and Jews throughout the world nevertheless function as a form of collective memory by constructing and filtering what should and should not be remembered by the community. 

The tension between history and memory (or in the case of Childs, "canon and criticism") is most problematic---as evidenced by Childs---when the historian participates within the collective memory of the community under investigation. This is why both Childs and ~yerushalmi express their discomfort and dissatisfaction while attempting to operate with one foot in each world and this is, I think, the central critique of Klein: historians operate from the outside looking in (an etic approach), while practitioners of memory operate from within (an emic approach). Yet, this etic/emic distinction only makes sense when memory is placed on equal footing with history as a means of interrogating the past. From this perspective, I wholeheartedly agree with Klein that such an approach undercuts the epistemological foundations of modern historical inquiry. However, Klein does not address memory as the *object* of historical study. This, I think, is what makes ~yerushalmi's approach so intriguing. Although he acknowledges his precarious position as a Jewish historian, ~yerushalmi discusses memory *as an historian* and it is this approach which I think is the most fruitful avenue of memory research. Thus, this dissertation will treat memory as a phenomenon which can be studied historically rather than as a source of information about the past.

## Memory, Myth, and the "Actual Past"

Halbwachs's did not see any reason to assume that the remembered past had any meaningful connection to the "actual past." Because memory is always constructed in the present for use in the present, the "actual past" does not carry any meaningful influence on this (re)construction. It was in his ~legendary-topography that Halbwachs's makes this case most forcefully, and I think he does so quite convincingly. Halbwachs's understanding of memory as a phenomenon of the present has thus earned him the label "presentist" or "constructivist" over and against a number of more recent theorists who wish to attribute to the past some normative force.[@coser_halbwachs1992, 27--30] This presentist mantle has been donned by a number of more recent scholars, perhaps most notably by the German scholars Jan and Aleida Assmann.[See esp. @assmann_nikulin2015; @assmann2011; and @a_assmann2011]

### The Presentist Perspective

Where Halbwachs distinguished between autobiographical and historical memory, Jan Assmann describes what he calls communicative and cultural memory (German: *kommunikatives* and  *kulturelles* *Gedächtnis*, respectively).[@assmann2011, 36; For a concise terminological crash-course, see @hubenthal_carstens-hasselbalch2012, 182--183] Rather than focus on the relationship of the rememberer to the experience (viz. whether the memory is "autobiographical"), this terminology essentially distinguishes between synchronic and diachronic processes of memory. On the one hand, communicative memory represents a synchronic, or "horizontal" memory shared by a society at a particular chronological horizon, based on direct communication between individuals. According to Assmann, this memory has a temporal horizon of 80--100 years---limited by spatial (where people are) and chronological (how long people live) factors. He writes:

> A typical instance would be generational memory that accrues within the group, originating and disappearing with time or, to be more precise, with its carriers. Once those who embodied it have died, it gives way to a new memory.[@assmann2011, 36]

On the other hand, at the end of this period, as the memory begins to lose relevance and those with direct connections to the events, people, and places which the memories involve die off, the remembering community will either forget or transform the memory for long-term transmission in the form of *cultural memory*. The canonization of memory at points during this period is a conscious, *constructive* activity by a remembering group. [@assmann2011, 45]

Where Halbwachs's terminology took as its point of departure the psychological perspective toward memory of Freud[@terdiman_radstone-schwarz2011] and Bergson[@ansellpearson_radstone-schwarz2011], Assmann's taxonomy is rooted in ethnological research on oral traditions, specifically that of Jan Vansina and his notion of a "floating gap" between the present and the distant past.[@vansina1985] Vansina observes that in oral cultures often there is an abundance of common knowledge about current goings-on and a similar abundance of shared knowledge about the distant past (esp. with regard to origin stories and the like), but there often exists a gap for the not-so-distant past. The proportion of collective knowledge, therefore, is unevenly distributed between two chronological poles of memory, although members of the society in question may not perceive it as such in their own reconstructions of the past.[@vansina1985, 23--24. As Assmann, observes, "In the cultural memory of a group, both levels of the past merge seamlessly into one another."] In other words, from the perspective of the remembering society, often there exists a continuity between the distant past (often legendary or mythic) and the near-past (a few generations, at most) where in reality a good deal of the not-so-recent past has fallen from memory. Memory of the near-past---those things which, while not necessarily "autobiographical" to every rememberer, nevertheless are reinforced by those with autobiographical memory---is categorized as "communicative" because it is memory that it generated and spread in the present by those with direct access to the events in question. Those memories which are deemed significant enough to not be forgotten---those which make up cultural memory---undergo a process by which they are transformed from "factual into remembered history," and may take the form of myth or legend.[@assmann2011, 37--38] Thus, according to Assmann, myth and legend cannot be distinguished from "history" as a part of cultural memory. The significance of an event is not tied to whether or not it is "factual," but by its "truth" seen through its continued relevance to the remembering community in the present. Assmann writes:

> Myth is foundational history that is narrated in order to illuminate the present from the standpoint of its origins. The Exodus, for instance, regardless of any historical accuracy, is the myth behind the foundation of Israel; thus it is celebrated at Pesach and thus it is part of the cultural memory of the Israelites. Through memory, history becomes myth. This does not make it unreal---on the contrary, this is what makes it real, in the sense that it becomes a lasting, normative, and formative power.[@assmann2011, 38]

Assmann's understanding of the relationship of the actual past to a society's cultural memory, therefore is not concerned with the discussion of the historicity of cultural memory. Although Assmann does not dismiss cultural memory as a source for historical inquiry, like Halbwachs, his primary interest is in exploring the constructive, presentist aspects of memory.

### The Continuity Perspective

Critics of Halbwachs's presentist posture (and, by extension, that of Jan and Aleida Assmann) agree that memory is malleable but argue that there are constraints placed upon memory which mitigate unbounded fictionalization of the remembered past. This so-called "continuity" (or "essentialist") perspective---primarily associated with the American sociologist Barry Schwartz---insists that the "actual" past carries some normative force in the shaping of collective memory.[Schwartz has made numerous contributions to the field of memory studies. See esp. @schwartz_sf1982; @schwartz_asr1991; and @schwartz2000; Note also the SBL volume specifically interacting with his work: @thatcher2014] Critiquing Halbwach's, Schwartz writes:

> Unfortunately, this [Halbwachs’s presentist] perspective has problems of its own. It promotes the idea that our conception of the past is entirely at the mercy of current conditions, that there is no objectivity in events, nothing in history which transcends the peculiarities of the present.[@schwartz1982, 376]

At the heart of the so-called “continuity” approach is the conviction that while memories are often—perhaps always—conditioned by the present, there is a limit to the amount of distortion acceptable to the remembering community. As Michael Schudson puts it, "The past is in some respects and under some conditions, highly resistant to efforts to make it over."[@schudson1989, 107]

In fact, I think the conceptual distance between the presentist and continuity perspectives is not as great as some have made it out to be. Neither Halbwachs nor Assmann assert that there *cannot* be any historical value to cultural/collective memory, nor that such memory cannot be used for historiographical purposes. Likewise, Schwartz and the continuity perspective never argue that memory *is reliable* only that, rather, memory ought not be treated as *entirely* arbitrary. In other words, the two perspectives both agree on the central premise that memory is shaped by society in the present, but they each approach the question of memory's connection to the actual past from opposite ends of the epistemological spectrum.

## Keys and Frames

Although Schwartz understands ....<<<Schwartz also built on Halbwach's notion of the interaction between social and collective memory. Schwartz understands this two-way interaction between the remembered past and the present in terms of “keying” and “framing.” *Keying*provides a mechanism by which people are able to associate present figures with those of the remembered past---offering a shared context for understanding the figure’s role. Having established the key, *framing* brings back the remembered context into the present to guide a group’s collective understanding.[@thatcher2014, 3]

Comparatively few scholars within the field of Hebrew Bible have utilized Schwartz' work, although he seems to be the favorite among NT scholars (who seem more theoretically adventurous than HB scholars in this area, for whatever reason). He himself has made a few contributions to NT scholarship,[@schwartz2005a; @schwartz2005] and even has a Semeia volume specifically addressing his work.[@thatcher2014] From my perspective, Schwartz' understanding of "keys" and "frames" could be very useful tools for the study of intertextuality and inner-biblical exegesis.

## Collective Memory, and Cultural Memory, and Social Memory: A Terminological Assessment

Although Halbwachs used the term "collective memory" to talk about the interaction between memory at the individual, psychological level and the social frameworks which enable the act of recollection, recent work in memory studies has seen a proliferation of terminology which has both clarified and (at times) obfuscated the discussion

In fact, there is a grand tradition of imprecise and overlapping terminologies within memory studies going back to Halbwachs himself. For example, on page 40 of *On Collective Memory*, Halbwachs uses the terms "collective memory," "social memory," "social frameworks of memory," and "collective frameworks of memory" and it is not entirely clear what how Halbwachs is distinguishing between them. The way that he is able to use the terms almost interchangeably has led some in the current discussion to treat them as synonyms. As Anthony Le Donne observes, "In fact, ["social" and "collective" memory] are currently used synonymously with such frequency that their nuances vary from author to author [@ledonne2009, 42 n.8]. Yet, Le Donne points out, Halbwachs actually uses these terms in with slightly different nuances. On the one hand, Halbwachs uses the term "sociaux" when he is describing the way social structures affect memory, while on the other hand "Collective Memory" tends to refer to the content of memories which are transmitted between individuals [@ledonne2009, 42 n.8]. In other words, when Halbawachs uses the term "social" he is usually talking about *frameworks* of memory, whereas "collective memory" might be cautiously glossed as "common" or "shared" memory. Sandra Hübenthal puts it well, "The difference [between social and collective memory] lies in the perspective: _social memory_ is using the framework, _collective memory_ is establishing it" [@hubenthal_carstens-hasselbalch2012, 180].

