

# The Chronicler's Temple: Social Memory and Magnetism in Chronicles

Scholars of the Hebrew Bible have long observed that the book of Chronicles is a derivative work of Samuel--Kings reflecting the concerns and religious sensibilities of the late Persian or Early Hellenistic Periods. For example, in his classic work on the history of ancient Israel, Julius Wellhausen begins his treatment of the history of traditions within Judaism with a lengthy discussion of the book of Chronicles. In his treatment of the book, Wellhausen argues that the history of Israel as portrayed in Chronicles differs from that portrayed in Samuel--Kings due to the chronological distance of the works and the intervention of the Priestly Code into the theology of  ~2T Judaism.[@wellhausen1957, 171--172; See also @wright_ulrich-wright1992] Chronicles, according to Wellhausen, provides a clear example of the way that ancient Israel's traditions evolved over time. Just as the legal material of the Hexateuch developed over the centuries, so too the traditions of the historical books were subject to the changing theologies of later centuries. While the particulars of the relationship of Samuel--Kings to Chronicles and the nuances of priestly influences on the Hebrew Bible remain subject to scholarly debate, the broad consensus remains that 1) Chronicles was written sometime in the late Persian or early Hellenistic periods, 2) it heavily utilized Samuel--Kings as a literary source, and 3) it bears an ideological *Tendenz* influenced by (though not identical to) the final layers of the Pentateuch.[For a thorough and reasonably recent summary of the *status questionis*, see @knoppers2003, 72--89; See also @japhet1993; @japhet2009; @braun1986; and @coggins1976] 

The scholarly discourse surrounding the formation of the Hebrew Bible has increasingly turned to memory studies as a robust framework for describing the processes by which the biblical traditions were produced and transmitted.[@wright2014; @blenkinsopp2013; @rogerson2010; @davies2008; @hendel2005;  @smith_cbq2002] Wellhausen chose to begin his treatment of the history of traditions with Chronicles because of the relative security with which scholars are able to date Samuel--Kings and the major Pentateuchal strata ~vis-a-vis Chronicles. For the very same reason, Chronicles likewise has played an important role in early applications of memory theory within biblical studies.[@benzvi_st2017; @benzvi-a_evans-williams2013; @benzvi-b_evans-williams2013].  While Chronicles is not the *latest* book in the Hebrew Bible, it is uniquely situated at the end of the traditioning process preserved in the Hebrew Bible. In some ways, therefore, Chronicles gets the last word on a certain set of traditions surrounding the monarchic period, in particular those of David, Solomon, and the kings of Judah.

Although it is broadly agreed upon that Chronicles exhibits a hypertextual relationship to Samuel--Kings, treating Chronicles as an exemplar of Rewritten Bible (~rwb) is somewhat less common.[Though, not particularly *un*common: @campbell_zsengeller2014; @zahn_lim-collins2010; @bernstein_textus2005; Alexander considers Chronicles to be a "prototype" of ~rwb, see @alexander_carson-williamson1988, 100; I have adopted the terminology of hyper-/hypotext from Genette. In this case, to say that Chronicles is a "hypertext" of Samuel--Kings is to say that it is derivative, but not a commentary on Samuel--Kings. See @genette1997, 5] The ambivalence of scholars towards treating Chronicles as ~rwb is rooted, unsurprisingly, in the confusion surrounding the definition of the term (see Chapter 1). Knoppers, for example, takes special care to treat the question of whether Chronicles should be understood as ~rwb in the introduction of his commentary and notes, from the very beginning, that he will answer the question based on what he understands to be the essential elements of ~rwb.[@knoppers2003 , 129--134] He writes:

> They [~rwb] select from, interpret, comment on, and expand portions of a particular biblical book (or group of books), addressing obscurities, contradictions, and other perceived problems with the source text. Rewritten Bible texts normally emulate the form of the source text and follow it sequentially. The major intention of such works seems to be to provide a coherant interpretive reading of the biblical text.[@knoppers2003, 130]

Knoppers observes that, while Chronicles exhibits most of the specific literary moves  which ~rwb is known for (expanding, harmonizing, and augmenting its *Vorlage*), the presence of material which is entirely unique to Chronicles cannot be attributed to a purely exegetical or explanatory impulse. In addition to the narrative additions within Chronicles, the genealogies of 1 Chr 1--9 have no corollary in Samuel--Kings, and can hardly be considered a rewritten form of the Penatateuch.[@knoppers2003, 132] Thus, while Knoppers affirms that certain portions of Chronicles "may be profitably compared with a number of rewritten Bible texts,"[@knoppers2003, 131] ultimately he concludes that Chronicles "is more than a paraphrase or literary elaboration of the primary history"[@knoppers2003, 134] and thus ~rwb cannot can account for Chronicles as a whole, instead suggesting that it should be treated as its own work.[@knoppers2003, 131--134]

While Knoppers' assessment is fair given the definition that he supplies for ~rwb, I have adopted a broader definition of ~rwb that accommodates for Knoppers' reservations. The rationale for why ~rwb cannot account for the complexity of the whole book of Chronicles, according to Knoppers, is the same basic argument that I have made for why an *exegetically* focused definition of ~rwb is insufficient to account for the complexity even of the literature that scholars *traditionally* consider to be ~rwb. Knoppers' criticisms, therefore, could just as easily be applied to Josephus' ~ant or to ~jub (or, I would argue, even to ~ga) and why I have suggested that memory studies may provide a useful model for discussing ~rwb.

This chapter will focus on the ways that social and cultural memory theory can be applied as a model for explaining the processes by which the Chronicler[^chronicler] utilized traditions in Samuel--Kings and the way that those traditions shaped and were shaped by the social location of their author(s). In particular, I will focus on the memory of the Temple in Jerusalem and the way that the figure David---as portrayed in Chronicles---functioned together with the temple as "magnetic" sites of memory within ~2T Judaism.[@benzvi_st2017, 73]

[^chronicler]: Throughout this chapter I will refer to "the Chronicler" to refer simply to the the author or authors who are responsible for the book of Chronicles and not, as others have used the term, to refer to the common author of Chronicles, Ezra and Nehemiah.

## David's Census and Araunah/Ornan's Threshing Floor

The account of David's census in 2 Samuel and its hypertext in 1 Chronicles provides a clear example of the way that present ideologies play a significant role in the reception of cultural memory by a society and its (re)construction in the social memory. Both 2 Samuel 24 and 1 Chronicles 21 recount the story of David's census, the punishment that Yahweh inflicts on David for doing so, and David's penitential offerings at the threshing floor of Araunah/Ornan. 

<!-- More here. Perhaps talk about "Nodes" -->

### 2 Samuel 24

The narrative in 2 Sam 24 begins by stating that Yahweh had become angry with Israel and "incited David against them" (*wayyāseṯ ʾeṯ-dāwiḏ bāhem*). David orders the census and is stricken with remorse <!-- Kaplan suggests looking at Lambert about "guilt" --> (it is not clear in the text why this was a bad thing). Yahweh offers him a choice through the prophet Gad between three years of famine, three months of pursuit, or three days of pestilence. David consents to the pestilence, and, after seeing its destructive force in the form of an angel, pleads with Yahweh to punish him personally, and not to continue harming the people. The prophet Gad instructs David to make offerings to Yahweh where he saw the angel, at the threshing floor of Araunah,  the Jebusite. David purchases the threshing floor and Araunah's livestock, builds an altar to Yahweh, and makes his offerings.

The purpose of this pericope within Samuel is not clear and its ostensible connection to 2 Sam 21:1--14 is merely thematic<!--Hackett doesn't get this connection either-->.[@mccarter1984, 509]  The internal logic of the narrative is no less problematic: the text offer no explanation for Yahweh's anger, nor does it explain the connection between the census and the pestilence. While Yahweh's initial anger can be accounted for theologically (gods do not need reasons to be angry), the connection between the census and the pestilence seems to be built on some tacit correlation between the two. McCarter, following a number of earlier studies, for example, has suggested that the danger in taking a census is found in the connection between the census and ritual failure. Drawing comparisons to Num 1:2--3 and Exod 30:11--14, McCarter notes that censuses in the ancient world were generally performed for military purposes (Num 1:2--3) or to levy funds (Exod 30:11--14). Since the purpose of David's census seems to be a measurement of military might, it likely would have involved enrolling fighting-aged men in the military (Cf. Num 1:2--3), thereby forcing those enrolled to remain ritually pure in accordance with military standards.<!-- FN here about military purity?--> The likelihood that not all of the soldiery would be able to maintain this level of purity would have been high and may have been thought <!--by whom?--> to invite divine retribution. <!--Isn't it enough that they could have been afraid for their lives, their sons' lives?--> On the other hand, while the census instructions in Exod 30:11--14 were not for the purposes of the military, they did require that each person "give a ransom for his life to Yahweh" (*nāṯənû ʾı̂š kōp̄er nap̄šô la-yhwh*),  "lest a plague come upon them at their registration" (*lōʾ-yihyeh ḇāhem neḡep̄ bip̄qōḏ ʾōṯām*). The explicit connection between registration (√*pqd*) and plague (*neḡep̄*) again passes without explanation, but again, the stipulation that those registered must provide a ransom (a half-shekel to the sanctuary and a half-shekel as "an offering to Yahweh" [*tərûmāh la-yhwh*]) opens the possibility for ritual failure.<!--Hackett still doesn't het it here--> In both cases (maintaining ritual purity and making ransoms), the near-certain failure of some percentage of the population provides a plausible explanation for the association of people-counting and plague.<!-- Do I agree with McCarter here?-->

At the literary level, then, the function of the pericope could---as with much of the so-called History of David's Rise (HDR)---be understood as an *apologia* for David's putative decision to ask for a census (against Joab's advice) and a subsequent calamity perceived to be caused by it. If the story originated from a time when it was well-known that David had commanded the census, the story provides an explanation for why David made the decision (at Yahweh's prompting) despite the (apparent) risk of plague that accompanied numbering the people.[@mccarter1984, 518] Furthermore, David's self-sacrificial posture is put on display through his willingness to take on the punishment personally and by his willingness to purchase Araunah's threshing floor (at full price) and make the appropriate offerings to Yahweh.

### 1 Chronicles 21

While the broad strokes of 2 Sam 24 and 1 Chr 21 remain quite similar, a few relatively small differences found in 1 Chr 21 dramatically alter the literary and theological significance of the tale.

<!-- JAH sees the "OLD" stuff in the above-->

#### Yahweh or (a) Satan?

The most noticeable change made in the Chronicler's narrative is seen in who incited David to take the census in the first place. While 2 Sam 24 attributes this act to Yahweh, 1 Chr 21 introduces a new figure to the story referred to as *śāṭān*. <!-- JAH sees the "OLD" stuff in the above--> 1 Chr 21:1 reads:

> *way-yaʿămōḏ śāṭān ʿal-yiśrāʾēl way-yāseṯ ʾeṯ-dāwı̂ḏ limnôṯ ʾeṯ-yiśrāʾēl*
>
> [a] *śāṭān* stood up against Israel and he incited David to count Israel.

Scholars remain divided over whether *śāṭān* should be understood as a simple indefinite noun "an adversary," [@stokes_jbl2009; @japhet2009, 114--117; @japhet1993, 370--390] or whether the absence of the definite article indicates that by the time of the Chronicler, Satan referred to a malevolent spirit which prefigured the more developed, personified "Satan" found in the New Testament.[@rollston_keith-stuckenbruck2016, 4--5]  The most common usage of the term *śāṭān* in the Hebrew Bible refers to human adversaries and accusers generally (see, Num 22:22, 32; 1 Sam 29:4, 2 Sam 19:23; 1 Kgs 5:18, 11:14, 23, 25; Ps 38:21, 71:13, 109:4, 6, 20, 29). However, the figure *haś-śāṭān* (with definite article) in both the prologue to Job (chs. 1--2) and Zech 3:1--2 appears as a celestial figure to whom Yahweh speaks directly.[^zech] Proponents of reading *śāṭān* as the personal name of a malevolent spirit argue that the absence of the definite article indicates that the idea of *the śāṭān* of Job and Zechariah had evolved into a fully personified Satan by the time of the Chronicler.[@braun1986, 216--217; @coggins1976, 107; Rollston also finds this reading compelling, though, not without difficulties. See, @rollston_keith-stuckenbruck2016, 4--5] Additionally, while the LXX hails from a slightly later chronological horizon than Chronicles, it is worth noting that the translator used the indefinite substantive *diabolos* to translate *śāṭān*---the same term used in Job and Zechariah (also, Ps 108:6) *with* a definite article---which gives some indication that, in the mind of the translator, these passages likely referred to the same entity.[^diabolos] <!--Might be good to reference the devil-made-me-do it or tried to make me texts in Jubilees--><!-- Also, this Greek stuff might need a bit more detail-->

[^diabolos]: Elsewhere the LXX renders the nominal forms of *śāṭān* with the feminine *diabolē* or, in the case of 1 Kgs 11:14, simply in transliteration as *satan*. It should be noted, however, that Esther 7:4 and 8:1 render the Hebrew √ṣrr as the masculine *diabolos* as well.

Critics of this view, however, have pointed to the fact that in other cases in the Hebrew Bible, generic nouns that are treated as personal names or titles often *do* retain the definite article.[@japhet2009, 114--117; @japhet1993, 370--390] Japhet, for example, notes that direct references to the Canaanite deity Baʿal are always accompanied by the definite article. In every instance, the name/title *baʿal* is made grammatically definite whether by adding the definite article, pronominal suffixes, or being in construct with an explicitly definite noun.[@japhet2009, 115; citing @gkc, §126d] In such a case, *śāṭān* should simply be understood as an indefinite noun, "an accuser" and may be understood as a human antagonist of David.[@stokes_jbl2009; @japhet2009, 114--117; @japhet1993, 370--390] 

[^zech]: This notion is more clear in Job, where *haś-śāṭān* is described in the heavenly courts and is described as having supernatural powers over the health and prosperity of those on the Earth. On the other hand, the reference in Zechariah is somewhat ambiguous. Zech 3:1 reads: *way-yarʾēnı̂ ʾeṯ-yəhôšuaʿ hak-kōhēn hag-gāḏôl ʿōmēḏ lip̄nê malʾaḵ yhwh wə-haś-śāṭān ʿōmēḏ ʿal-yəmı̂nô ləśiṭnô*, "And he showed me Joshua, the high priest standing before the angel of Yahweh, and *haś-śāṭān* was standing on his right (side) to accuse him." The antecedent of "his" in "his right(side)" is unclear. If "his" refers to the *malʾaḵ* Yahweh, then *haś-śāṭān* likely refers to some kind of spiritual being. However, it is possible that "his" refers to Joshua, and that *haś-śāṭān* should be understood as a human adversary.

Regardless of how one understands *śāṭān* to be functioning,  the author of Chronicles plainly understood the mechanisms at work---whether supernatural or interpersonal---differently than the author of 2 Sam 24. Chronicles, therefore, shifts the incitement away from Yahweh and removes any reference to the deity's anger prior to the census, thereby simplifying the rationale for David's guilt and Yahweh's retribution. The resulting narrative removes the problematic "entrapment" of David  and absolves Yahweh from seeming so "mercurial." [@rollston_keith-stuckenbruck2016, 4]

#### The Threshing Floor of Araunah/Ornan and the Temple of Solomon

The pericope in 1 Chr 21 likewise ends with a significant deviation from its hypotext preserved in 2 Sam 24. While both accounts describe the angel of Yahweh relenting from his destructive activities at the threshing floor of Araunah (=Ornan in 1 Chr 21) the Jebusite, the significance of the site as the future location of the Temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem is made explicit only in the Chronicler's account. The Chronicler asserts that the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite would become the spot for the construction of the Solomon's Temple by putting it on the lips of David himself in 1 Chr 22:1, stating :

> *wayyōʾmer dāwı̂ḏ zeh hûʾ bêṯ yhwh hāʾĕlōhı̂m wəzeh-mizbēaḥ ləʿōlāh ləyiśrāʾēl*
>
>  Then David said, "This is the Temple of Yahweh God, and this altar for burnt offerings is for Israel"

The declaration is fulfilled in 2 Chr 3:1 when Solomon begins to construct the temple:

> *wayyāḥel šəlōmōh liḇnôṯ ʾeṯ-bêṯ-yhwh bı̂rûšālaim bəhar hammôrı̂ā ʾăšer nirʾāh ləḏāwı̂ḏ ʾāḇı̂hû ʾăšer hēḵı̂n bimqôm dāwı̂ḏ bəḡōren ʾornān ha-yəḇûsı̂*
>
> Solomon began to build the temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem on mount Moriah, where Yahweh appeared to David, his father, where David had designated, at the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite.

The question of whether the author of the account in 2 Sam 24 understood this story to be an etiological account of the founding of the Jerusalem temple or whether this detail was the invention of the Chronicler, however, is not clear from the biblical text. Unlike the book of Chronicles which gives the precise location of the temple of Solomon, Samuel--Kings makes no specific claims about the location of the temple. Mordechai Cogan has argued that this silence is was rooted in the desire of Deuteronomistic school to forfend the suggestion that the site of the temple was determined by an historical event, rather than the divine edict.[@cogan_tarbiz1986, 307] Thus Cogan seems to imagine that reference to Araunah's threshing floor must have been removed from the account of the temple's construction in 1 Kgs 6--7 by the Deuteronomistic editor in order to maintain this principle.[@cogan_tarbiz1986, 307] On the other hand, Isaac Kalimi has suggested that the reason for this neglect in 1 Kgs 6--7 can be attributed to the assertion that the location of the temple in Jerusalem (as well as all the other temples in the Hebrew Bible, whose locations are not specified) was so well known that "there was no need to mention them."[I would, however, make the observation that, depending on how one dates the account in 1 Kng 6--7, it may be the case that an *exilic* author genuinely did not know the precise location of the temple. However, Kalimi also points out that other ANE temple building texts often neglect to specify the precise location of their subjects. On this point, I would also hasten to add that monumental inscriptions should be treated separately, since the location of the inscription, ostensibly, *would be* the location of the temple. @kalimi_htr1990, 355--356] Furthermore, Kalimi suggests that the selection of Araunah's threshing floor as the future location of the temple was made sufficiently clear by the account of 2 Sam 24 thereby obviating the need to repeat the location in 1 Kings.[@kalimi_htr1990, 357] The Chronicler, therefore, merely makes explicit that which the Deuteronomistic Historian meant to imply.

I am not at all convinced by either of the above arguments. Instead, I suspect that the construction account in 1 Kings makes no mention of Araunah's threshing floor because, at the time of its composition, the connection had not been made. The significance of threshing floors as preferred locations for theophanies has been documented elsewhere[McCarter points to Jdgs 6:37 among other, less clear, examples from the Hebrew Bible. He also notes their significance in the Ugaritic literature (KTU 1 17.5.4ff; 19.1.19ff) @mccarter1984, 511--512; See also @waters2015] and the fact that 2 Sam 24 recounts a sort of theophany may be enough to account for its mention in the narrative. 

Although it is not clear whether the connection was made originally by the Chronicler himself or whether it was an inherited tradition, the rationale for making Ornan's threshing floor the site of the temple likely grew from an uneasiness with the notion that David built and utilized an altar at a secondary location (viz., a place that was not the tabernacle). At the same time, the Chronicler understood that the future location of the temple would be in Jerusalem and had to deal with the fact that David not only made the offerings, but did so at the command of Yahweh. To resolve these tensions, the Chronicler was able to assert that David, indeed, made sacrifices outside the tabernacle, but with his offerings, he laid the groundwork for the construction of the temple.



<!--Maybe add a paragraph that summarizes the passages and why exegetical approaches have not addressed the issues properly.-->

## Constructing the Memory of the Chronicler's Temple

Having addressed the particular ways and specific rationales that the Chronicler likely employed while composing 1 Chr 21, we may now turn to the topic of social memory and the ways that this theoretical framework can be utilized to explore the phenomenon of biblical rewriting. While the individual changes and additions made by the Chronicler may, on their own, provide some insight into the ideology of the Chronicler and his position toward a few theological topics, treating the Chronicler's work as social memory attempts to take this a step further. Beyond questioning the intention of the author, social memory theory seeks to explore the ways that received traditions may have functioned at the social level as a part of a community's essential project of identity building and maintenance.[Ben Zvi puts it well: "Everything is supposed to be forgotten except that which is supposed to be remembered by a group. Social, shared remembering within a group involves and requires a social effort by the relevant group, but without such an effort and shared memory, the group itself would cease to exist." @benzvi_st2017, 70]

### Magnetism

In the context of social memory theory, magnetism refers to the quality of certain core sites of a community's social memory which tend to accumulate additional significances over time as more ideas and sites of memory become "attracted" to it.[I have borrowed this term from Ben Zvi, who has used the term in numerous contexts. See @benzvi_st2017; also @benzvi_edelman-benzvi2013] The analogy could be extended further by thinking of this magnetism in the context of the interaction of gravitational forces between bodies in space. Larger mnemonic nodes, given their greater "mass," attract smaller bodies to themselves forming orbital systems akin to the way that the planets of our solar system are held in orbit by the sun and how the moon is held by the gravitational forces of Earth. As more nodes attach themselves the relative mass of the core mnemonic node (that is, the larger "central" node) continues to grow in a sort of "positive feedback loop."[@benzvi_edelman-benzvi2013, 6; Alternatively, this idea could be modeled using graph theory as a scale-free network and treating central mnemonic sites as hubs and peripheral sites as sparse nodes. See, @barabasi_science2009] Within the biblical tradition, perhaps the premier example of such a node within the Hebrew Bible is Moses. Ben Zvi writes:

> Not only does he bring together Torah/the bestowal of Torah with the Exodus, but he also serves as the foundational prophet, scribe, lawgiver and so on. Even the story of Israel's rejection of YHWH and subsequent punishment and future reconciliation is directly associated with him.[@benzvi_st2017, 73--74]

Using this model, the book of Deuteronomy functions as one means by which traditions become attached to Moses through the retelling process and the ability of the author to synthesize lesser sites of memory with central ideas and figures creating newer, even more significant and highly connected mnemonic sites.<!--expand and clarify; check back with ben Zvi here. I need more--> 

Both the Jerusalem temple and king David loom large in biblical memory, so it is no surprise that both of these mnemonic sites function magnetically. In the case of David, for example, it is commonly argued that one Elhanan, and not David, was the historical defeater of Goliath the Gittite, as recorded in 2 Sam 21:19b:

> *wayyaḵ ʾelḥānān ben-yaʿrê ʾōrəḡı̂m bêṯ hallaḥmı̂ ʾēṯ golyāṯ haggittı̂ wəʿēṣ ḥănı̂ṯô kimnôr ʾōrəḡı̂m*
>
> Elhanan, son of Yaʿre-Oregim (the Bethlehemite), killed Goliath the Gittite, the shaft of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.

In this case, it is supposed that the more potent mnemonic site (David) is connected to the well-known slaying of the Philistine giant at the expense of Elhanan. The extended narrative of David and Goliath from 1 Sam 17, likewise bears the signs of magnetism. In fact, the name "Goliath" only occurs twice in the extended narrative, in vv. 4 and 23, which has caused some scholars to question whether the identification of the "giant" with Goliath was, like David, a secondary addition. In every other instance throughout the narrative, the man is referred to simply as "the Philistine." Thus, it is supposed that the story originally may have been entirely anonymous, and only later were these figures identified with David and Goliath.[For a fuller account of the textual issues surrounding the main narrative about David and Goliath, see, @mccarter1980, 280--309; and @mckenzie2000, 69--77] Thus McCarter's, observation that "[d]eeds of obscure heroes tend to attach themselves to famous heroes,"[@mccarter1984, 450] though not rooted in memory theory *per se*, fits our model for "magnetic" figures.

Within the story of David's census and the threshing floor of Oruna in 1 Chr 21, several mnemonic sites can be understood as exhibiting magnetic qualities. First, although the identity of *śāṭān* is not clear in the text, later treatments of the story, including in the LXX, treat the character as a malevolent supernatural being. The potency---at least in the interpretation of later periods---of Satan was able to don this particular mischief and take credit for the incitement of David to sin. One might imagine, given *haśśāṭān*'s subordinate position ~vis-a-vis Yahweh in the prologue to Job, that the two passages were not seen to be in direct conflict with one another, whatever the original intent of the Chronicler might have been. Shifting the incitement of David away from Yahweh can be explained by the ostensible discomfort (or confusion) created by the story in 2 Sam 24, but, supposing *śāṭān* was imagined by the Chronicler to be a supernatural being, we can account for the Chronicler's choice as an example of magnetism on the part of Satan.

Second, the identification of Ornan's threshing floor with the future site of the Solomonic Temple creates an explicit connection between two very potent mnemonic sites: David and the Temple. The discourse surrounding the fact that it was Solomon and not David who constructed the Temple of Yahweh predates even the DtrH, as indicated by 2 Sam 7, but the degree to which David involves himself in making preparations for the construction of the temple in 1 Chr 22:2--29:22 indicates that DtrH did not get the last word on the matter. While 2 Sam 7 provides an apologia for why it was Solomon, and not David, who built the temple, Chronicles takes it a step further by attributing the planning and preparation of the temple's construction to David, leaving only the most nominal tasks for the temple's "builder," Solomon. The inability of David's mnemonic gravitas to fully absorb the temple's construction illustrates the immutability of certain mnemonic sites, particularly those such as buildings and geographic features, despite the relative significance of David for the continued maintenance of Judean identity continued into the ~2T Period ~vis-a-vis Solomon.

Finally, after identifying the site of the temple of Solomon with Ornan's threshing floor, and drawing the mnemonic sites of the temple and king David even closer together, the Chronicler includes one additional piece of information to the reader in the description of the temple's construction in 2 Chr 3:1:

> *wayyāḥel šəlōmōh liḇnôṯ ʾeṯ-bêṯ-yhwh bı̂rûšālaim bəhar hammôrı̂ā ʾăšer nirʾāh ləḏāwı̂ḏ ʾāḇı̂hû ʾăšer hēḵı̂n bimqôm dāwı̂ḏ bəḡōren ʾornān hayəḇûsı̂*
>
> Solomon began to build the temple of Yahweh in Jerusalem *on the mountain of Moriah* where he appeared to David, his father, the place which David designated, on the threshing floor of Ornan, the Jebusite.

Although this is the only reference to the *mountain* of Moriah in the Hebrew Bible, the *land* of Moriah is mentioned only in Gen 22, the Aqeda, as the land to which Abraham was to bring Isaac for sacrifice (on a mountain!).[@kalimi_htr1990, 358--359] The reference to Moriah appears to be another example of the magnetic quality of core events in a community's identity. In the same way that David's sacrificial acts at the threshing floor of Ornan---in the memory of the Chronicler---prefigured and made acceptable the offerings made by David there, so too the near-sacrifice of Isaac, by its geographic association with the foundation of the temple in Jerusalem, becomes a prototype for the sacrificial cult.[In fact, ~vermes makes this point explicit and traces the tradition into early Christianity. See @vermes1961, 204--211]

## Conclusions

Although the author of Chronicles should be given credit for some creative invention, one cannot divorce such innovation from the social forces that surrounded and enabled the Chronicler. Traditional approaches to the book of Chronicles have focused on the sources, interpretive strategies, and ideologies that the Chronicler utilized in the composition of his work. For this reason, the Chronicler *himself* is credited (or blamed, as the case may be) for the sometimes significant differences between the stories preserved in the DH compared to their reflexes in Chronicles. Even those studies which deal extensively with the ideology of the Chronicler have tended to focus on such ideologies and their impact on the *individual* of the Chronicler. By putting so much weight upon the Chronicler as an individual, however, scholars have---it seems to me---been less open to considering the ways that the Chronicler himself may have been influenced by a body of tradition that---while perhaps rooted in the text of the DH---informed the way that he presented his history. 

The memory approach, on the other hand, focuses on the the ways that traditions are transmitted over time, and how their malleability allows them to be reshaped by each successive generation, as well as their potency for affecting the contemporary cultural discourse. In the case of Chronicles, the magnetic quality of David is shown by the way he had become associated with the other core sites of memory and Judahite identity such as the building of the temple, and even (by extension) the Aqedah.