# The Rewritten Bible

## Introduction
TODO: Introduce topic of RwB

## Vermes: Scripture and Tradition in Judaism
<!-- Introduce S&T -->
The scholarly discussion of the Rewritten Bible began with Geza Vermes' pioneering work on early jewish exegetical traditions, *Scripture and Tradition in Judaism: Haggadic Studies* published in 1961.[@vermes1961] Prior to the mid-twentieth century, the prevailing approach to the study of haggadic exegesis was to treat the haggadah as originating with novel biblical interpretation made by individuals and focused primarily on texts which modern Judaism still considered authentic. As Vermes recounts, haggadic traditions were viewed as "the result of the adoption, and anonymous repetition, of popular interpretations by favourite preachers." [@vermes1961, 3] Furthermore, the Tannaitic interpretations, dated from the second century CE (represented by Targums Onkelos and Jonathan) were considered the most ancient haggadic traditions. Thus a good number of ancient texts—apocrypha, pseudepigrapha, and sectarian texts—were excluded from discussions of the origins of haggadic exegesis.

A series of publications and discoveries beginning in the 1930's, however, began to undermine the notion that these early exegetical traditions began in the second century CE. Vermes credits this broadening of haggadic studies to a series of major studies and discoveries such as Rappaport's *Agada und Exegese bei Flavius Josephus*,[@rappaport1930] Paul Kahle's Schweich Lectures at the British Academy on the Cairo Geniza (given in 1941, published 1947),[@kahle1947] Kisch's new text edition of Ps. Philo's *Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum* (1949),[@kisch1949] the discovery of the Dead Sea scrolls (1948) and Codex Neofiti (1956), as well as (and perhaps especially) Renée Bloch's work on midrash [@bloch1954; @bloch1955; translated and reedited as @bloch1955_repr; @vermes1961, 3--7]. The overarching theme among these works was the hard evidence for a methodological continuity between early interpretive traditions and later haggadah. For example, Vermes notes that Rappaport's work on *Jewish Antiquities* identified substantial overlaps between Josephus's text and  Rabbinic haggadah. He suggested, therefore, that Josephus had drawn from an already living tradition of interpretation. The implication of his suggestion is that the haggadah of the second century were not novel exegetical works, but were themselves products of earlier exegetical traditions.

According to Vermes's introduction, the explicitly stated purpose of the work, therefore, was to push the field beyond synchronic analysis of haggadah toward diachronic, historical analyses to trace the development of these exegetical traditions [@vermes1961, 1].

The first six chapters of the book offers a series of studies which bring various works of early jewish exegesis into conversation with later rabbinic traditions. In them Vermes surveys a number of biblical passages and themes alongside their varied post-biblical manifestations with the goal of tracing the historical evolution and interdependence (or, in some cases independence) of each tradition. Each study follows a somewhat formulaic pattern of synoptic presentation, explanation, and analysis, but each is meant to illustrate a particular aspect of the relationship between the earliest detectable interpretive traditions of the Hebrew Bible and the later traditions contained within the targums, haggadah, and midrashic materials.

The first three chapters of *Scripture and Tadition* make up Part I of Vermes's study, entitled, " The Symbolism of Words." In this section, Vermes focuses on the way that individual words and ideas take on localized symbolic meanings which are then applied globally to the interpretation of the Bible. In his first chapter, he notes the divergent treatment of Gen 44:18--19 among ancient commentators and proceeds through a synoptic study of this passage in the Fragmentary Targum, Targum Neofiti, and the Tosefta of Targum Yerushalmi. He concludes that the Fragmentary Targum represents the most primitive work, whose interpretive strategy is essentially inner-biblical (by harmonizing Gen 44 and 49 with Exod 7--9), followed by the Tosefta, which seems to depend on the Fragmentary Targum but takes a different interpretive stance, and finally Targum Neofiti, which combines the two. In this second chapter, Vermes examines the way that the word "Lebanon" came to be used symbolically in the Hebrew Bible and other jewish literature and how those symbolic meanings developed, particularly the association of Lebanon with Jerusalem and the Temple. He identifies the Song of Songs as the intermediary text which helped to establish this tradition within post-exilic Judaism, noting that the book occupies the unique position as the only biblical text which clearly uses the name Lebanon symbolically for the Temple. Importantly, Vermes shows that the symbolic use of Lebanon to represent Jerusalem and the Temple is rooted in *biblical* exegesis. This is a key idea for Vermes because it establishes a continuitty between the production of the biblical text and its later interpretation. In chapter three, Vermes examines other words which take on symbolic meaning in later Jewish texts ("lion," "Damascus," "*Meḥoqeq*," and "Man"), and shows the relative similarity of the process between the DSS texts and the targumic and midrashic materials.

It is in the second part of *Scripture and Tradition*  that the topic of  Rewritten Bible is addressed most directly. This section---titled "The Rewritten Bible"--- covers two chapters (chapters four and five), both focusing on the figure Abraham and the haggadic traditions surrounding his life.

In chapter four, Vermes embarks on what he calls a "retrogressive historical study" by which he means beginning with the traditions in their later, more developed forms, and working back toward their origins. In this case, Vermes begins with the 11th century CE text *Sefer ha-Yashar* (and the varied extra-biblical traditions contained therein) then works backward to identify sections of the text which exhibit earlier traditions, for example, in Targums, Josephus, Jubilees, (Ps.) Philo, and others. The purpose of this chapter is to demonstrate that even late texts can contain valuable information about earlier methods of exegesis. As Vermes puts it, "[Sefer ha-Yashar] manifests a direct continuity with the corresponding tradition of the time of the second Temple, but reflects also the influence of the haggadah of the Tannaim and Amoraim."[@vermes1961, 95]

In chapter five, Vermes proceeds with a "progressive historical study," by which he means a study beginning with the oldest materials and working forward. Still focusing on the figure Abraham, Vermes treats in detail the relationship between Gen 12:8--15:4 and cols. 19--22 of the Genesis Apocryphon. Vermes treats Genesis Apocryphon as "the most ancient midrash of all"[@vermes1961, 124] and views it as the "lost link between the biblical and the Rabbinic midrash" [@vermes1961, 124]. As I understand it, the Genesis Apocryphon, for Vermes, occupies a unique position just one step removed from inner-biblical exegesis. The task of GA's author was "to make the biblical story more attractive, more real, more edifying, and above all more intelligible" and he accomplishes this through a variety of means [@vermes1961, 125]. The work of the GA author, therefore, was to "[reconcile] unexplained or apparently conflicting statements in the biblical text in order to allay doubt and worry."[@vermes1961, 125] According to Vermes, the interpretation of Genesis is "organically bound" to the text of Genesis and the additions that *were*  made sprung from the interpretation of the Bible itself and not whole-sale from the mind of the author [@vermes1961, 126]. Where texts like Jubliees sought to systematically advance a theological vision, according to Vermes, the author of GA intended to simply "explain the biblical text," calling it illustrative of "the unbiased rewriting of the Bible."[@vermes1961, 126]

The final two chapters make up the final section, titled "Theology and Exegesis" and push the discussion to include early Christianity. Chapter seven is entitled "Circumcision and Exodus 4:24--26" but offers a subtitle of "Prelude to the Theology of Baptism," which gives some hint at the ultimate, if tacit, goal of the chapter. Discussing the topic of circumcision in Ex 4:24--26 and its treatment among the early exegetes, Vermes's primary observation is simply that the theology of circumcision and the exegetical traditions which surrounded it, were affected by historical forces and theological ideologies. For instance, he claims that Jubilees omitted the rather odd statement that God was going to kill Moses---who was saved by the circumcision of his son by Zipporah---because "It was impossible for its author to accept that God tried to kill Moses as it was for him to believe that Moses neglected to circumcise his son on the eighth day after his birth."[@vermes1961, 185] Similarly, he notes that after the Bar Kokhba rebellion, the practice of circumcision was outlawed and so, "it is not surprising, therefore, to find the spiritual authorities of Palestinian Judaism emphasizing the greatness and necessity of this essential rite, and explaining away ... every possible biblical excuse for delaying the circumcision of their children."[@vermes1961, 189] He ends the chapter by suggesting that the early Christian association of baptism with circumcision (citing Rom 4:3--4 and Col 2:11--12) was enabled by the traditional Jewish association of circumcision withe blood sacrifice ("the Blood of the Covenant")[@vermes1961, 190]. That Paul (to whom he attributes both Romans and Colossians) associated baptism with circumcision therefore, was "not due, therefore, to his own insight, but springs directly from the contemporary Jewish doctrine of circumcision which he adopted and adapted."[@vermes1961, 191]

Vermes makes a similar move in chapter eight, entitled "Redemption and Genesis XXII: The Binding of Isaac and the Sacrifice of Jesus." In it, he compares a number of ancient works' treatment of the Aqedah and demonstrates how the (near-) sacrifice of Isaac became a prototype for the entire sacrificial system in later judaism. The sacrifice of animals in the Temple functioned as a "reminder" to God of the faithfulness of Abraham. Furthermore, he shows the ways the tradition grew to focus on the willingness of Isaac to be sacrificed and his function as a proto-matryr. Thus, he ends the chapter by addressing the New Testament's portrayal of Jesus as a willing sacrifice to God and its putative relationship to the Aqedah. Vermes makes the case that the redemptive theology of the NT---typically attributed to Paul---was not original to him. He writes:

> For although [Paul] is undoubtedly the greatest theologian of the Redemption, he worked with inherited materials and among these was, by his own confession, the tradition that "Christ dies for us according to the Scriptures."[@vermes1961, 221]

He then proceeds to push the origin of this theology back further into the first century CE, and, in rather dramatic fashion, suggests that the introduction of the Aqedah motif into Christian theology---by means of the Suffering Servant---may have been by Jesus himself [@vermes1961, 223].

He concludes the chapter by discussing the Aqedah and the Eucharist. Just as the whole sacrificial system pointed back toward the binding of Isaac in targumic exegesis, the eucharistic rite likewise was intended---according to Vermes---to point back to Jesus's redemptive sacrifice. Thus he concludes:

> Although it would be inexact to hold that the Eucharistic doctrine of the New Testament, together with the whole Christian doctrine of Redemption, is nothing but a Christian version of the Jewish Akedah theology, it is nevertheless true that in the formation of this doctrine the targumic representation of the Binding of Isaac has played an essential role.

> Indeed, without the help of Jewish exegesis it is impossible to perceive any Christian teaching in its true perspective.[@vermes1961, 227]

## Beyond Scripture and Tradition
Although rightly cited as the work that introduced the term "Rewritten Bible" to the field, it is worth noting that in *Scripture and Tradition*, the identification and definition of the phenomenon of RwB is a secondary concern to Vermes's larger thesis about the historical evolution of haggadic exegesis in antiquity. Something about the term, however, caught the attention of the field and a number of scholars have since taken up the task of studying the phenomenon of Rewritten Bible in its own right.  The scope, purpose, and meaning of the term Rewritten Bible (and the more common Rewritten Scripture) has now been the topic of scholarly discussion for some time now so it will be beneficial to map out the major positions of the past several decades before providing a brief *status quaestionis* and my own thoughts on the matter.

### Early Positions
I have selected three early contributors to the topic of RwB who are representative of distinct approaches to describing these texts: George Nickelsburg, Daniel Harrington, and Philip Alexander. While there is some overlap, Nickelsburg and Harrington represent a less rigid, non-generic, approach to RwB, while Alexander represents those who see RwB as constituting a distinct generic category.

#### George Nickelsburg (1984)
<!-- 620 -->
In his 1984 article "The Bible Rewritten and Expanded," George Nickelsburg discusses a number of texts which are "very closely related to the biblical texts, expanding and paraphrasing them and implicitly commenting on them."[@nickelsburg_stone1984, 89]  Thus, for Nickelsburg, Rewritten Bible was not a discrete category of texts. Moreover, Nickelsburg's article involves more than just "rewritten" texts (as the title indicates), and also discusses texts which introduce wholly new material into the traditions of the Bible [@nickelsburg_stone1984, 89--90]. However, he does provide a list of texts which he loosely describes as examples of biblical rewriting: 1 Enoch, Book of Giants, Jubilees, Genesis Apocryphon, Biblical Antiquities, the Books of Adam and Eve (Apocalypse of Moses, Life of Adam and Eve), and some Hellenistic Jewish Poets. The inclusion of 1 Enoch is novel, compared to Vermes's original list, and illustrates the more expansive view that Nickelsburg has toward RwB.[^nick-more]

[^nick-more]: Nickelsburg also includes in his discussion a few works by hellenistic Jewish poets. These works include Philo's *On Jerusalem*, Theodotus's *On the Jews*, and the *Exagoge* by one "Ezekiel the Poet of Tragedies."

One of the key contributions that Nickelsburg makes is his idea that rewriting followed a trajectory from smaller units of rewriting---involving short stories that deal with particular events from the biblical text---to longer, more systematic, treatments which span multiple biblical books. His treatment of 1 Enoch (which is, at least in part, the earliest text that he deals with) is illustrative of this approach. Rather than dealing with 1 Enoch as a whole, Nickelsburg addresses the various rewritings of the flood narrative throughout 1 Enoch as well as in the Book of Giants (which is not formally a part of 1 Enoch, but has a clear connection to the work). This interaction of 1 Enoch with the biblical text revolves around a single event, the flood, and its causes. The Genesis Apocryphon, on the other hand, seems to span most of Genesis; Jubilees covers Genesis through the beginning of Exodus, and *LAB* covers Genesis through the death of Saul in 1 Samuel.

Although Nickelsburg generally accepts that the rewritten texts "comment" on the Bible, he notes that the posture toward the biblical text is also not uniform among even the agreed upon RwB texts. He notes, for example, that while the author of Jubilees's concerns are largely halakhic and the book makes explicit reference to the biblical text, the authority assumed by the author of Jubilees does not (at least rhetorically) originate in the exposition of the Torah, but in the "immutable heavenly tablets."[@nickelsburg_stone1984, 100--101] Nickelsburg thus states:

>   This process of transmitting and revising the biblical text reflects a remarkable view of Scripture and tradition. The pseudepigraphic ascription of the book to an angel of the presence and the attribution of laws to the heavenly tablets invest the author's interpretation of Scripture with absolute divine authority."[@nickelsburg_stone1984, 101]

In contrast, the Genesis Apocryphon seems to have very little interest in halakhic matters and instead seems to just elaborate on the story by giving detailed geographic details and more dramatic characters [@nickelsburg_stone1984, 106]. Finally, he observes that *LAB* likewise differs with Jubilees in its omission of halakhic matters and its "highly selective reproduction of the text."[@nickelsburg_stone1984, 110] This selectivity also differs from the Genesis Apocryphon, which otherwise is "characterized by the addition of lengthy non-biblical incidence."[@nickelsburg_stone1984, 110]

Nickelsburg differs from Vermes mainly in the way he views the Bible during the late Second Temple period. Although Nickelsburg observes that the preoccupation with certain texts suggests that they were held in high regard, he does not have the same interest in tying the exegetical practices of, for example, Jubilees, with earlier inner-biblical or later haggadic traditions.

#### Daniel Harrington (1986)
<!-- 360 -->
Daniel Harrington's 1986 contribution entitled "Palestinian Adaptations of Biblical Narratives and Prophecies I: The Bible Rewritten (Narratives)," adopts the term "Rewritten Bible" to talk about texts produced around the turn of the era by Palestinian Judaism that  "take as their literary framework the flow of the biblical text itself and apparently have as their major purpose the clarification and actualization of the biblical story."[@harrington_kraft-nickelsburg1986, 239] Compared to Vermes, he operates with a slightly expanded list of rewritten texts. In addition to Jubilees, Genesis Apocryphon, Ps. Philo's *Biblical Antiquities* and Josephus's *Jewish Antiquities*, he also includes the Assumption of Moses and 11QTemple (Temple Scroll). Furthermore, he makes a point to suggest that a number of other texts may be able to be included in the list, including *Paralipomena of Jeremiah*, *Life of Adam and Eve/Apocalypse of Moses*, and *Ascension of Isaiah*.

Harrington's major contribution is his explicit rejection of RwB as a category or literary genre in favor of a process-oriented approach. In this respect, Harrington takes a broad view of rewriting and allows, to some degree, that this process be understood similar to a reception history (although, this is my term, and not his). He states:

>   Nevertheless, establishing that these books are not appropriately described as targums or midrashim is not the same as proving that they all represent a distinctive literary genre called "rewritten Bible." In fact, it seems better to view rewriting the Bible as a kind of activity or process than to see it as a distinctive literary genre of Palestinian Judaism" [@harrington_kraft-nickelsburg1986, 242--243]

 Instead, he observes that while texts such as Jubilees and *Assumption of Moses* both constitute a rewriting of the Bible, both "are formally revelations of apocalypses."[@harrington_kraft-nickelsburg1986, 243] This is an important criticism of scholars who see RwB as a distinct genre. Unlike, for example, the Gospels, which arguably have the same basic "form," the texts typically described as "rewritten" come in a variety of "forms" such as narratives (Genesis Apocryphon), apocalypses (Jubilees), and, legal (Temple Scroll). In other words, a single *genre*---insofar as the word describes a literary *form*---is not sufficient to subsume the varied *forms* which all can be described as "rewritten."

#### Philip Alexander (1988)
<!-- 660 -->
While Nickelsburg and Harrington make important observations about Rewritten Bible, Philip Alexander's 1988 article, "Retelling the Old Testament," stands out as perhaps the most significant early contribution to RwB studies after *Scripture and Tradition* and remains one of the most thorough treatments of the idea of a RwB "genre." Alexander's goal is to examine the use of the biblical text within the so-called RwB texts to determine whether they form a distinct genre and whether there exists a set of concrete criteria by which scholars can admit or exclude texts from the category [@alexander_carson-williamson1988, 99].

Through a series of four case studies (Jubilees, Genesis Apocryphon, *Liber Antiquitatum Biblicarum*, and Josephus's *Jewish Antiquities*) Alexander determines that RwB *does* form a distinct literary genre and sets out nine "principal characteristics" of RwB, which deserve to be enumerated here:

1.  They are *narratives* which follow the order of the biblical text. He broadly refers to the texts as "histories" (as distinct from theological treatise).

2. They are "free standing" literary works that take on the same form as the text that they rewrite. As such, they do not "comment" on the text explicitly, but weave a seamless retelling of the biblical story.

3. They are not meant to replace the biblical work.

4. They cover a great deal of biblical narrative. Here he also notes that certain works which are primarily "expansive" (the Book of Giants, the Book of Noah) probably should not count because their relationship to the biblical text is "centrifugal," while properly RwB texts are "centripetal" to the biblical text (more on this, below).

5. They follow the biblical text's narrative order, but do not, necessarily include everything. They are "highly selective in what they represent"[@alexander_carson-williamson1988, 117], but do not omit so much that the integrity of the biblical account is compromised. He notes "A proper balance between the 'literal' and the 'non-literal' sections is probably of fundamental importance to the genre."[@alexander_carson-williamson1988, 117]

6. They offer an interpretive reading of Scripture which (quoting Vermes) offer "a fuller, smoother and doctrinally more advanced form of the sacred narrative"[@alexander_carson-williamson1988, 117; citing @schurer1986, 305] and seem to functionas a sort of commentary. In this way, the text is meant to be supplementary to the biblical text (see \#3) [@alexander_carson-williamson1988, 117].

7. They are limited by their particular (narrative) form and are only able to offer a *single* interpretation of the rewritten text. Alexander contrasts this with those of the Rabbis and Philo who are each able to offer multiple interpretations of the a single text, and thus, "treat the underlying text as polyvalent."[@alexander_carson-williamson1988, 117]

8. They are further limited by their form which does not allow them to explain their exegetical reasoning.[^explain]

[^explain]: He writes: "The methods by which they solve the problems of the original are essentially midrashic, i.e. similar to those found in the rabbinic midrashim. But unlike the midrashim (or Philo) they cannot make explicit their midrashic working."  @alexander_carson-williamson1988 [118]

9. They incorporate material which is not exegetically derived from the biblical text---such as oral tradition, legends, etc.---and fuse it with the rewritten text.

Although I disagree with his conclusions, Alexander's treatment is thorough and he advances the conversation in a few important ways. Perhaps the most significant contribution that he makes is the introduction of the extremely helpful terms "centrifugal" and "centripetal" to describe a text's relationship to the Bible. He writes:  

> Rewritten Bible texts are centripetal: they come back to the Bible again and again. The rewritten Bible texts make use of the legendary material, but by placing that material within an extended biblical narrative (in association with passages of more or less literal retelling of the Bible), they clamp the legends firmly to the biblical framework, and reintegrate them into the biblical history."[@alexander_carson-williamson1988, 117]

The major advantage to limiting RwB to texts which exhibit a centripetal relationship to the biblical text is the removal from consideration of works which merely allude to the Bible.

### More Recent Criticisms and Adaptations
The past twenty years have seen a resurgence in interest in the topic of RwB and the terminology that surrounds it.

#### The Lower Bound: Between Bible and Rewritten Bible
One recent avenue of investigation has been to explore the boundaries between the biblical text, editions, translations, and rewritten biblical texts. Vermes, of course, utilized the targums liberally in *Scripture and Tradition*, but his goal was to blur the line between post-biblical texts via the haggadah. Most scholars treating RwB, however, are not inclined to include the targums among RwB. But the targums---and for that matter the LXX and Samaritan Pentateuch---do uniquely represent interpretive traditions. Furthermore, the instability of the biblical text during the late Second Temple period, as exhibited by the varied editions of Jeremiah found at Qumran and other liminal texts, such as 4QReworkedP, has problematized the question of what may have constituted "Bible" (or, more properly, "scripture") at the time.

Unsurprisingly, Emanuel Tov has been at the forefront of this investigation. In his 1998 article, "Rewritten Bible Compositions and Biblical Manuscripts, with Special Attention to the Samaritan Pentateuch," Tov's purpose is to specify the "fine line between biblical manuscripts and rewritten Bible texts."[@tov_dsd1998, 334] By this, Tov means that he is concerned with what I have termed the "lower bound" of the definition of RwB, specifically, the distinction between a text *edition* and a distinct composition, which Tov considers "rewritten." The primary difference between these two categories of texts, according to Tov, is not how dramatically the daughter text diverges from its parent, but the *purpose* of the daughter text [@tov_dsd1998, 334]. According to Tov, this purpose is mirrored in the putatively authoritative status of the "biblical" text vis-a-vis the rewritten text which, he says, is not authoritative (although, he seems to suggest that this is up for debate[@tov_dsd1998, 337]). For example, he notes that the extant texts of Jeremiah, while widely divergent in length and order, still represent "biblical Jeremiah" which carries some authoritative weight. Tov is, however, careful to point out that the nature of this authority is not clear and "the boundary between the biblical and non-biblical texts was probably not as fixed as we would have liked for the purpose of our scholarly analysis."[@tov_dsd1998, 335]

Tov makes explicit that he understands the SP as participating in this same sort of process as the rewritten texts from Qumran, making special mention of the 11QT^a (The Temple Scroll), Genesis Apocryphon, and Jubilees. Tov, therefore, is attempting to draw a parallel between the sorts of exegetical additions included in these three LXX texts and those included in the SP and the "classical" RwB texts from Qumran.

The more significant contribution to this area, however, is Michael Segal's 2005 article "Between Bible and Rewritten Bible," which, in the tradition of Alexander, attempts to enumerate a series of criteria by which scholars can distinguish between editions of biblical texts and so-called rewritten texts.

Segal's understanding of the role of RwB is rooted in the conviction that a rewritten text is a "new" work that derives its own authority by means of its association with a biblical text. The new composition carries with it the purpose and any theological or ideological*Tendenzen* of the new author, but keeps piggy-backs off of the status of the underlying text.[@segal_henze2005, 11] Segal writes:

> Even though these rewritten compositions sometimes contain material contradictory to their biblical sources, their inclusion within the existing framework of the biblical text bestows upon them legitimacy in the eyes of the intended audience ... the inclusion of this material within the framework of the biblical passages under interpretation transforms the ideas of the later writer into authoritative and accepted beliefs. [@segal_henze2005, 11]

And further:

> The nature of the relationship between rewritten biblical compositions and their sources constitutes a paradox. On the one hand, the rewritten composition relies upon biblical texts for authority and legitimacy. The author claims that any new information included in the later work already appears in earlier sources. But simultaneously, the insertion of new ideas into the biblical text, ideas that may even contradict the beliefs and concepts of the original biblical authors, undermines the very authority that the rewriter hopes to utilize" [@segal_henze2005, 11-12]

While I find Segal's characterization of RwB texts problematic, his main contribution to the discussion are his criteria for distinguishing between "biblical" and RwB texts. He distinguishes between "external" and "internal" characteristics.

##### External Characteristics
 Segal's external characteristics are by far his weakest. He notes two external characteristics of RwB texts: "language" and "relationship between the source and its revision."

1. Language: While he offers little rationale for this criterion, Segal categorically dismisses the possibility that any RwB text could have been written in a language other than its *Vorlage*. Notably, this criterion excludes, Genesis Apocryphon, Josephus's Antiquities, and Ps. Philo's *LAB*.[^language]

[^language]: Segal needlessly undercuts himself here. One might wonder that if a single criterion categorically excludes several texts which meet all the other criteria, perhaps the problem is with the criterion. In his discussions of other criteria, he begins by giving the principle by which the "edition" would assert itself as equal to its *Vorlage*, then contrast that with the RwB (see, esp. Expansion v. Abridgment). His reasoning is sound for a text edition (although I think the issue of textual authority and *translation* is, perhaps, too hastily ignored in this case), and could easily be contrasted with, for example the Genesis Apocryphon, which meets nearly all of his internal criteria.

2.  The Textual Relationship between the Source and Its Revision: The underlying text must be "visible" in the RwB text. He uses the book of Chronicles as the parade example of this relationship and notes the caveats necessary in dealing with *Vorlagen* from this period (i.e., it is difficult to say what is 'rewritten' versus what is just another variant in the *Vorlage*).

Segal notes that both of these criteria, in fact, apply to textual editions, as well as to RwB texts [@segal_henze2005, 20]. In other words, these are not "distinguishing" criteria, so much as the baseline for consideration.

##### Literary (Internal) Criteria for "Rewritten Bible"

It is the "Literary Criteria" which Segal, ultimately, believes provide the *definition* of RwB texts.[@segal_henze2005, 20] Segal provides six internal criteria:

1. Scope of the Composition: "Editions" of texts cover the same material as their source. In other words, one expects an edition of Genesis to cover the same material as the book of Genesis; pluses and minuses do not stray into other works. On the other hand, rewritten texts "do not generally correspond to the scope of their sources" [@segal_henze2005, 20]. For example, he observes that Jubilees Covers Genesis and part of Exodus, and Chronicles covers parts of Samuel and Kings. Oddly, he also notes that Ps. Philo---which is not written in Hebrew---runs from Genesis into 1 Samuel. He writes: "In all these examples the change in the scope of the composition created a new literary unit." [@segal_henze2005, 20--21]

2. New Narrative Frame: Several of the RwB texts include a framing narrative. His examples include the Temple Scroll and Jubilees, both of which re-frame the "biblical" material. In the case of both works, the Torah is assumed and the new work presumed to be a reflection of a second, direct revelation of the law to Moses, albeit by different means (and fragmentary, in the case of the Temple Scroll). In Jubilees, the angel of the Presence revealed this "second Torah" during Moses' second ascent (Exod 24). On the other hand, the Temple scroll seems to begin in Exod 34 [@segal_henze2005, 22].

3. Voice: While biblical narratives are generally written in a "detached" third person style, Segal observes that both Jubilees and the Temple Scroll "change the voice of the narrator throughout" [@segal_henze2005, 22]. As far as I can tell, what Segal means is that in these RwB texts,  certain evens which are narrated in the third person in the biblical text are re-framed as, for instance, direct discourse in the first person by an angel, or even by God.[^narrator]

[^narrator]: This may seem like a minor quibble, but the "narrator" has a distinct and technical meaning in narrative criticism which should be maintained. I would note, however, that this sort of reframing is not unique to RwB, since, e.g., Deuteronomy does something similar (perhaps Segal considerd Deuteronomy to be RwB?). This is a weak criteria, in my mind.

4. Expansion versus Abridgment: By-and-large, text editions are *additive*. That is to say, when there is a discrepancy between the amount of content (as opposed to the order), typically the shorter text is considered older. Segal is here concerned with editorial changes, and not with scribal errors, which, of course could go in both directions (through parablepsis et al.). This property, he contends, is rooted in the conviction of the scribes that in order to reproduce a text, one must reproduce the *entire* text.[@segal_henze2005, 24] Rewritten bible texts, however, felt free to add *or remove* material because they understood themselves to be composing an entirely new work.[@segal_henze2005, 24]

5. Tendentious Editorial Layer: "Editions" do not change fundamental ideology of the work. For example, differing editions of Jeremiah may differ but those differences do not change the fundamental ideology of the work. Likewise, expansion and addition to the work (e.g. additions to Daniel) are in line with the theological *Tendenz* of the shorter book. On the other hand, RwB texts freely alter the ideologies of the text, for example,  Jubilees.[@segal_henze2005, 25]

6. Explicit References to the Source Composition: "Editions" cannot (in a meta-discusive sense) reference its base text. RwB texts can.

In a more recent article, Tov returns to the topic of text editions and their relationship to the phenomenon of RwB[@tov_krarrer-kraus2008]. Tov addresses three "strange" texts from the LXX which, for one reason or another, differ significantly from the preserved MT (3 Kingdoms, Esther, and Daniel). Evoking a number of Segal's criteria[@segal_henze2005] for inclusion in the category (which he acknowledges to be well accepted, if not terribly well defined), Tov suggests that these LXX texts likewise may exhibit 1) a new narrative frame, 2) expansion and abridgment, and 3) a tendentious editorial layer and therefore may be candidates for RwB.

##### Summary
It is important to think about what Tov and Segal are trying to accomplish in these articles: They are trying to connect scribal practices which allowed for exegetical additions and emendations to "authoritative texts"---dramatic examples of which are provided by SP and LXX (though one wonders why the Targums aren't included here; perhaps because Tov is arguing for Hebrew *Vorlagen* of these texts, while the Targums represent a translation)---to the practices which produced the *new compositions* which scholars refer to as RwB texts. This is very similar to Vermes, albeit from a more "textual" perspective.

 What Tov's articles in particular demonstrate, however, is that the issue of authorial *intent* and *purpose* may be at the heart of the distinction between text edition and RwB. Of course, this is not something that can be objectively proven, but it *must* factor into our conversation, even if we must settle for speculation. The result is that, e.g., 4QReworked Pent. should be understood as RwB insofar as we imagine the author attempting something *other* than creating a text edition of the Pentateuch. Presumably the author of GA did not imagine himself creating a new edition of Genesis; the same with Jubilees and Chronicles. The issue of whether the resultant text was used authoritatively after the fact is beside the point; what matters was whether the text was either intended to be (or from the reader's perspective, whether the text was treated as) a copy of the text's *Vorlage*. And in the case of SP and LXX (and the Targums, I'd say), this seems to have been the case. Thus, it seems like these should not be treated as RwB.




<!--
#### Bernstein (2005)
#### Falk (2007)
#### Fraade (2006, 2010)
#### Crawford (2008)
#### Zahn (2010 et al.)
#### Brooke (2010)
#### Machiela (2010)
#### Teeter (2013?)
#### Campbell (?)

### Some kind of Synthesis
#### Limits of the Current Discussion
#### Genre and Process
#### Preoccupation with the written form?
-->
